The Passion for Souls
Chapter 8: WHY SHOULD WE GIVE TO FOREIGN MISSIONARY WORK?

M
AY I ASK you to tum to Proverbs, the eleventh
chapter, verses twenty-four and tweuty-five. These
verses read as follows: "There is that scattereth,
and yet increaseth; and there is that withholdeth more than
is meet, but it tendeth to poverty. The liberal soul shall be
made fat; and he that watereth shall be watered also himself."
Searching words, these, but true, nevertheless. It is pos-
sible to scatter what you have and still have more, whereas
if you try to keep it, you will have less. The men who in-
vested their talents doubled them, but the one who hid his
lost it. "The liberal soul shall be made fat; and he that
watereth shall be watered also himselt."
There are always those who want to know why we should
contribute to foreign missionary work. "Is there not enough
to do at home?" they ask.
"Why then send money to foreign
felds?" There are several reasons, and I am going to enumerate
them one by one. I want to ask you, if you wil, to give them
your most prayerful consideration.
MISSIONARY CHURCHES ARE PROGRESSIVE
First of all, I have discovered that missionary churches are
the only realiy progressive churches. In other words, "the light
that shines farthest, shines brightest nearest home" Show me
a church on fire for souls in the foreign feld and I will show
you a church on fire for souls at home. Show me a church
that contributes generously to the regions beyond and I will
show you a church that has solved its financial problems here
at home.
80
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
When I was in Palestine, I travelled from Jerusalem down
the Jericho road. I passed the ruins of the ancient city of
Jericho and went on to the Jordan River where Jesus was
baptized. I wanted to swim across the Jordan at that point,
and I did so. Then I continued on to the Dead Sea where I
had another swim.
Travelling North, I came at length to the
Sea of Galilee and there, too, I indulged in a swim. As I
stood on the shore, I thought of the difference between the
two bodies of water; one, the Sea of Galilee, teeming with.
life; the other, the Dead Sea, stagnant and lifeless. "Why",
I asked myself,
"the difference?"
The Dead Sea takes in and takes in, but it never gives out;
hence, it is stagnant.
The Sea of Galilee takes in but it also
gives out; hence, it is filled with life; and its water is fresh.
There you have a perfect illustration of the missionary
church and the church that is not interested in missions. The
latter takes in but it uses everything on itself. It never gives
out. Hence, it is filled with all sorts of loathsome creatures like
a stagnant pool-criticism, gossip, fault-finding, division, and
strife, etc. etc. The missionary church takes in, but it also
gives out. Hence it is alive and aggressive and God's blessing
rests upon it.
The same is true of the individual. The one who keeps
everything for himself and refuses to share it with others,
becomes a stagnant pool—a Dead Sea, a blessing to no one.
The one who invests in foreign missionary work, is living an
abundant life. It is for us to decide whether our lives are to
be symbolized by the Dead Sea or the Sea of Galilee.
WHERE ARE YOU LAYING UP TREASURE?
You are either laying up treasure in heaven or upon earth.
God's command is: "Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon
earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves
break through and steal. But lay up for yourselves treasures
in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and
where thieves do not breaks through nor steal." Everything you

82
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
have you must ultimately lose. Everything you invest in the
souls of men, you will save.
You are going to enter heaven
either a pauper, having sent nothing on ahead, or as
who is to receive an inberitance, made possible by contribu-
It reminds me of a legend of a very wealthy woman and her
coachman. She was expecting a mansion in heaven; but she
was led past the mansions to a little humble place of abode.
Upon inquiring as to the owner of one of the mansions, she
was told that her coachman was to live there. When she ex-
pressed amazement and disappointment, she was informed that
he had been sending up materials all his lifetime by investing
his money in the souls of men, especially in foreign lands; but
that she had sent up almost nothing and that they had been
forced to do the best they could with the material they had.
Some of us are getting on in life. We have a very short time
left in which to lay up treasure in heaven. We had better start
now or it will be too late. Everything we can send on ahead
will await our arrival and we will receive it back, with
dividends.
You MUST, PROVE YOUr LOVE
it you have going to in a resis a . Lo you can i,
investment you make; by your sacrifice for others; by your
efforts to give the Gospel to those in heathen lands. He wauts
"Faith without works is
share what you have with those who know Him not, in order
that they, too, may be brought to Him.
GOD'S SECRET OF PROSPERITY
I was holding a campaign in the Covenant Church, Minne-
apolis, of which Dr. Paul Rees is the Pastor. One night at the
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
83
close of my service, a well-dressed business man approached
the pulpit and shook hands with me. I did not know him.
"Dr. Smith," he said,
"I owe you everything I have in
life." I looked at him in amazement. Then he toid me his
"I was down and out," he began. "I had lost my job. My
wife and two daughters had left me. I was dressed in rags.
One day I happened to stroll into The Peoples Church during
one of vour Missionary Conventions. You were speaking, and
you were making some of the most astounding statements I
had ever heard in my life. You were saying, 'You cannot beat
God giving. Give and it shall be given unto you. Square with
God and God will square with you' I sat up and listened."
"Just to test your sincerity," he continued,
"I filled in one
of your cards, promising to give God a certain percentage of
all He might give me. That, of course, was easy because I
had nothing.
To my amazerent, within a few hours, I got
a job. When I received my fust pay, I sent in the amount I
had promised. Before long I got a raise. Then I contributed
more. Soon I had a new suit of clothes. In due time I got
a better job. Presently my wife and daughters came back to
mae. I continued giving. Before long, all my debts were paid.
Now," he exclaimed,
"I own my own home here in Minne-
apolis and I have money in the bank. All that I owe to you.
I found that you were right. I discovered that God was as
good as His Word."
My friend, do you want to kaow God's secret of prosperity?
You will find it in the example of the man whose story I
lave told. "Give and it shall be given unto you." To get
you must give. God, I say, will be no man's debtor.
Well do I remember the days of the depression. Hundreds
of men came to the church office for help. Several times I
questioned them. Not one of them was ever able to say that
he had squared with God during days of prosperity. God looks
"They that honour Me I will
notes to mao had beer Squa To ya God or A 1 mil
days of prosperity or you, too, may be standing in a breadline

84
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
when adversity strikes again. I know of no better way to
invest for God than by giving systematically to foreign mis-
sionary work.
MONEY SHOULD BE A MEANS TO AN END
Is money an end in itself; or is it merely a means to an end?
If it is an end in itself, then you are not seeking to extend
God's kingdom. So far as the Christian is concered, money
should only be a means to an end. If I were a business man,
I would work hard. I wowld ear as much as I could. And
if I could eam more than I needed for myself and those
dependent upon me, I would have a missionary in China. If
I could ear still more, I would have another in Africa and
then one in India, and so on. I would make money a means
to an end; and I would make the "end" the getting out of the
Gospel, especially in the regions beyond. I would line up
with God in His programme for world evangelism. Then I
could expect His richest blessing. Are you, my friend, earning
money for yourself or for God's work? What end have you in
MONEY WILLED BRINGS No REWARD
A great many people have an idea that they can "will"
their money to missions and that they will then be entitled to
a reward. Do you know that God never promises a reward
for those who give away their money after they are dead and
Why should they be rewarded for that which they
cannot help doing? God says very definitely that we are
rewarded for "the deeds done in the body." In other words,
we are rewarded only for what we do while we are still alive.
I want to know what my money is doing. I would not want
to will it to missions and then have my relatives fight over it
after I had gone, and lawyers get the most of it, I want to be
sure that it goes now for the things in which I am interested.
I want to give it, year bylyear, while I am still alive. Other-
wise, I know there will be no reward.
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
85
THE MEANING OF SACRIFICE
Do you know the meaning of sacrifice? I will never forget
a little girl by the name of Grace. She was saved in Dale
Presbyterian Church when I was in my twenties. Her heart
was in India. One day her mother told her she was going to
buy her a new top coat. The one she was wearing was thread-'
bare. She had worn it for six years. But Grace begged her
mother to give her the money, stating that she could wear her
.. old coat for one more winter. Her mother did so and Grace
sent it to her missionaries in India.
: Before I left Dale, Grace was taken ill. On her death-bed
she made her mother promise to sell all her clothes, such as
they were, and send whatever she got to India. The mother,
with tears in her eyes, promised. I would like to be standing
somewhere near the throne when Grace gets her reward. Her
heart was in India and her money followed her heart, regard-
less of the sacrifice. Do you, my friend, know anything about
that kind of sacrifice?
My FIRST FAITH-PROMISE
Never will I forget my first faith-promise. I had just become
pastor of the Christian and Missionary Alliance Tabernacle in
Toronto and a missionary convention was in progress. I sat
on the platform. Presently an usher came up to me and
handed me a card. I looked at it. "In dependence upon
God, I will endeavour to give towards the missionary work,
etc., etc." I said,
"Lord, I cannot give anything. I am only
earning twenty-five dollars a week and I have a wife and
child to keep and the war is on. Prices are sky high. I do
not have two cents to rub against each other at the end of
the week. How can I give?"
You see, I had never given in a systematic way. When I
gave a cash offering of a dollar or two; sometimes five dollars,
to missions, I really thought I was giving; but to make a

86
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
faith-promise and to give systematically, week by week-that
was foreign to me.
Presently I felt that as pastor I must set an example. I
simply had to do something. I prayed. "Lord," I said,
have nothing to give. What am I going to do?" Immediately
the Lord seemed to speak to me.
"I am not asking you for
what you have. 1 am asking vou ior a laith-promise, How
nuch can vou trust Me for?"
In a moment I saw it. "Oh,"
I said, "that's different! How much can I trust Thee for?"
I thought that perhaps I might be able to trust Him for five
dollars or possibly for even ten dollars. Suddenly He seemed
to speak again.
"Fifty dollars," He said. I was startled.
"Fifty dollars!" I exclaimed.
"Why, I have never heard of
giving such a sum. How could I ever give fifty dollars?"
But still the impression remained. It was to be fifty dollars.
With trembling hand I filled in the card and signed my name.
I wish I could tell you of the joy that was mine as, month
by month, I prayed for the necessary amount. How I got it
I do not know. All I know is that God sent it in, and that
by the end of the year I had paid the fifty dollars in full.
So great was the blessing, that next year 1 doubled the
amount and the year after I doubled that amount. Then I
doubled the amount again; and year by year, for more than
thirty years, it has been ray joy to make a definite investment
at the Annual Convention for Missions. Thus I have been
enabled to contribute many thousands of dollars by giving
consistently and systematically, year by year, as God has
prospered me.
What I am asking you to do I have done myself. I know
something of the joy of giving. 1 know what it means to invest
"I have seen the vision, and for self I cannot live.
Life is less than wortbless till my all I give." It is not, "how
much of my money will I give to God; but, how much of
God's money will I keep for myself?" I have discovered
that "It is more blessed to give than to receive." My friends,
you are missing one of the greatest blessings of your life it
you are not giving to missions.
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
87
How can the Board know how many missionaries to accept
for support unless you make out a faith-promise? You are
not behind the world-wide missionary policy of your church
if you do not co-operate in the programme. To give when
you feel like it instead of making a definite prayer-promise
does not require faith. I never nominate a man for office in
the church waless he has made out a faith-promise and thereby
proved that he is back of the programme. Those who tell me
they do not believe in pledges because they do not want their
left hand to know what their right hand does are certainly tell-
ing the truth. They give so little that their right hand would
be ashamed to let their left hand know. Beware, my friend,
lest you stand before the Bema with a large bank account that
should have been invested in missions. How will you explain
THEY SHALL SHARE ALIKE
Suppose a child should fall into a well, who would get the
reward for the child's rescue, the one who held the rope and
lowered the other to the bottom, or both? God says they will
share alike. The one who stands at the top and makes it
possible for the other to go down into the well in order that
the child might be rescued, is just as much entitled to the
reward as the one who goes down. You may not be able to
go down; you may never see the foreign field, but you can
hold the rope. You can make it possible for someone else to
go. You can send a substitute; and if you do, if you give your
money, your reward will be just as great as the reward of those
who actually go.
Everyone must be in the bucket brigade. You may not be
the one who throws the water on the fire at the end of the
line; you may be somewhere in the centre passing the bucket.
Or you may be dipping up the water. The question is, are
you in the line? Do you belong to the bucket brigade? Are
you doing something? Or are you merely a spectator? Our
motto must be: "Every Christian a Missionary."

88
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
THOSE WHO CAN GIVE
You can give as an individual. You can give as a pastor.
You can give as an evangelist. I know of no one wão can
do more tor missions than an evangelist. Fis is a golden
opportunity. In every campaign he holds, he can raise money
for missions. His is a tremendous responsibility. His love-
offerings can be love-offerings for the regions beyond.
Oh, that he could know the joy of it! And how God would
bless his ministry! Criticism would be gone. Commercialized
evangelism would never be mentioned. Tens of thousands of
dollars could be raised, hundreds of missionaries supported,
and a work done for God that would resound around the
world. When I held my campaigns in Australia, I brought
back over six thousand dollars for missions.
I also appeal to the pastor. He, too, can give,
can make his church a missionary church by teaching his
people to contribute to the greatest work in the world. It
is for him to lead; they will foliow.
help us not to fail.
What a ministry! God
WHERE TO GIVE
But when you give, make sure you do not give to help
spread modernism. Selecti evangelical Societies where every
missionary is true to the Word of God, and is out for souls.
So many stand for the Christianization of the world. Bible
Christians believe in the evangelization of the world.
There are those who emphasize the by-products of Chris-
tianity-education, social uplift, hospitalization, etc.
We
believe in putting the Gospel first. It is not our business to
educate the heathen. You should see that your money goes
where it will do the kind of work you believe in. You should
support only those missionaries that accept the Bible as the
Word of God, and are out to evangelize.
Give to the Societies where the overhead is low. Make sure
that most of what you give gets to the field. Inquire until
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
you are satisfied. You have a right to know where your
money is going, and how it is being used. At least eighty-five
to ninety per cent should reach the field.
WHAT HAVE YOU DONE?
"God so loved that He gave." He gave His only Son.
He gave heaven's best. What have you given? Have you
given yourself? Have you given your children? Have you
given your prayers? Have you given your money? Have
•you given anything? What have you done for those in dark-
ness and midnight gloom?
The Martyrs gave their all; they gave their lives. I have
preached in a Roman arena where fifty thousand Christians,
there and in other arenas, were thrown to the beasts or cruci-
fied; many of them made human torches, for their faith in
Christ. I have stood on the sand once red with their blood. In
the midst of the fames they cried out, "Christ is Victor!" They
gave their all. What have you given?
Is God asking too much when He asks you for your money,
when He asks you to share with Him what He has given you,
in order that those in heathen darkness may hear the Gospel?
Is a gift of money to be compared with a gift of life? If the
martyrs gave their all, can we not give at least something, and
thus do our part to evangelize the world?
How MUCH SHALL I GIVE
The other day I was handed a little slip of paper upon
which the question was asked,
"How much shall I give this
year to Missions?" The answer was fourfold; and in closing,
I want to leave with you the suggestions as I read them:
I. If I refuse to give anything to missions this year, I
practically cast a ballot in favour of the recall of every
missionary.
2. If I give less than heretofore, I favour reduction of the
missionary forces proportionate to my reduced contribution.
