The Passion for Souls
Chapter 4: "WHY

SHOULD ANYONE HEAR THE GOSPEL IWICE BEFORE
EVERYONE HAS HEARD IT ONCE?"
nine, verses thirty-five to thirty-eight: "And Jesus went
dabout all the cities and villages..." Note, if you will,
that He went about all the cities and villages. He did not
settle down in any one community. Jesus never became a
pastor. He was continually on the go.
"Jesus went about all
the cities and villages, teaching in their synagogues, and
preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every sick-
"But—when he saw the multitudes, He was moved with
compassion. ..." What about us? What happens when we
see the multitudes? Are we, too, moved with compassion?
"He was moved with compassion on them, because they
fainted and were scattered abroad, as sheep having no
"Then saith He unto His disciples, the harvest truly is
plenteous, but the labourers are tew.
" This, then, is the prob-
ler. And the problem of His day is the problem of our day-
COULD I STAY IN CANADA?
Years ago I went through the Bible to see if I could stay
in Canada and still obey God. Would it be possible, I asked
myselt, for me to enjoy a comfortable pastorate; never cross
38
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
the boundaries of my country and still carry out my Lord's
commands?
Would God be satisfied?
as I studied the Bible I found such expressions as
"All nations; all the world; every creature; every
kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation; the uttermost
part of the earth."
In other words, the Gospel, 1 discovered,
was to be given to the entire world. Every nation, kindred,
tongue, and people, must hear it.
When I saw that, this then was the question I asked: Do
all nations live in Canada? If they do, and if there are no
nations living beyond the boundaries of the Dominion, then
I can stay in my own country, preach the Gospel here and
never once cross the borders; but,—if one nation lives beyond
the boundaries of Canada, then I am in duty bound to leave
my country, cross the boundaries and go to that nation. And
if I cannot, then I must find substitutes and send them as my
representatives. And if I do neither, 1 wil be a missing
Christian in the day of rewards.
My friend, what about you?
You know that the Gospel
must be given to all nations, to all the world, to every kindred
nd tongue and people, to the uttermost part of the eart
hat are you doing about it? What are you going to do
ther you must go yourselt or else you must send someon
a vour place, and woe-betide vou if vou do nothing. God'
orders raust be obeyed, His commands carried out, and there
is no way to evade the issue.
I TRIED TO GO
When I was eighteen years of age I went to the Indians
of British Columbia. I lived in a little shack on an Indian
Reserve all alone, up near Alaska, between three and four
thousand miles from home. I stayed away for over a year;
then realizing that I needed more education, I returned at
last to civilization and settled down to a six years' course of
theology, finally graduating and being ordained to the Gospel
ministry.

40
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
I then applied to the Presbyterian Board of Foreign Missions
for work in India. My case was considered very carefully.
appeared personally before the Board and at last a decision
was reached. I was rejected. The Board felt that I would not
be suitable for missionary work, and so I was turned down.
I turned to work at home became pastor of Dale Presby-
terian Church, Toronto, and later of the Alliance Tabernacle;
but I was not satisfied. I knew that I had to do something.
I had seen the vision. Finally, I struck out on my own, going
to the Russian Mission Fields of Europe and preaching to vast
multitudes all over Latvia, Esthonia, and Poland, winning
many souls for Christ. Finally, one day, after having preached
till I was worn out, I fainted dead away and returned home.
All over the United States and Canada I travelled, holding
evangelistic campaigns. Finally I felt the urge again and this
time went to Spain, but again I became ill and had to come
Then I took over The Peoples Church in Toronto. That was
in the year 1930. Iwo years after, the urge came upon me
once more and I left for Africa. By horseback I penetrated
back into the interior, in the company of Dr. Thomas Lambie,
riding some thirty miles a day, finally collapsing in the long
grass of Africa; and after a' very serious illness that lasted for
six weeks, I was brought back once again to civilization.
By this time I was beginning to feel that the Board had
been right atter all and that I was not fited for missionary
work. However, I had seen the vision, I knew that other
nations had to hear the Gospel, and in 1938 I went once again,
determined to do my part, if at all possible, to help evangelize
the world. This time I left for the far Pacific, and after
travelling by steamer for thirty-one days, day and right, !
found myself preaching to the cannibals, the savages and the
Christians of the Solomon Islands. At length, however, I
contracted malaria fever, which lasted for three years, and
again and again, mouth after month, laid me low. Finally,
one day, Dr. Northcote Deck and the other missionaries put
me on a steamer and sent me back to my work in Ioronto.
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
41
I had tried to go and had visited altogether more than forty
countries; but I had discovered that it would be most difficult
for me to live in a tropical climate.
I TURNED TO SUBSTITUTES
In the early days of my ministry, realizing that I could not
go myself, I turned to substitutes. One day I approached
Rev. J. H. W. Cook, the leader of the Evangelical Union of
South America.
"You want to send out some new missionaries?" I said.
"Yes," he replied.
"We have five ready to go."
"Why don't you send them?" I inquired.
"We do not have the money," was his reply.
"If I cam succeed in raising the funds for their transporta-
tion, will you allow me to support them?" I asked him.
His face lit up as he responded in the affrmative.
Never will I forget the day I placed those five missionaries
on the platform of The Peoples Church and challenged the
congregation to send them out. They did so. Then the five
became ten; the ten, twenty; the twenty, forty; the forty, one
hundred; the one hundred, two hundred; the two hundred,
three hundred and fifty. Now we have an army of labourers
serving as our substitutes on some forty different foreign fields,
under thirty-five Faith Missionary Societies, and we provide
their "personal" support.
But ... I am not satisfied. I am praying constantly and
this is my prayer: "Lord, let me live, if it be Thy will, until
: we have four hundred missionaries on the foreign fields of
eartb." I feel that that is the number that The Peoples Church
should support and I will never be satisfied until we have at
least that many missionaries in the Regions Beyond.
This is what I am living for. This is what I exist for. I am
a pastor second; I am a missionaty first. I am a hymn-writer
second; a missionary first. I am an author second; I am a
missionary first. I tried to go myself; as a matter of fact, I
went, but each time it seemed that I had to come back. I

42
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
knew then that there was only one thing left to do; namely,
to send others. That is why I travel all over the United States
of America, the Dominion of Canada, Australia, New Zealand,
and Great Britain. I go in order to hold Missionary Conven-
tions and to challenge young people. I must do all I can to
find and send substitutes.
THE NEXT TowNS
A little while ago, I read in your hearing the story of how
Jesus went to all the cities and villages.
Do you remember
the time He disappeared, after having ministered in a certain
town; and do you recall how the disciples went in search of
Him, in the early hours of the morning, and how at last they
found Him on the top of a mountain engaged in prayer?
"Master," they cried, "the people are waiting for you. There
are many more sick to be healed. Come back and finish vou
vork. There are still others in the town in which you minis-
tered yesterday, who want to hear you"
Yes, and I can imagine the Master replying, as with a far-
away look in His eyes He gazed out over the valleys and the
mountains in the distance, in these words: "I must preach in
the next towns for therefore am I sent." He was thinking, as
He always did, of the next towns, and the next, and the next.
He was thinking of those towns in which He had never yet
ministered; and He wanted to get to them that they, too, might
hear the Gospel. He was ever mindful of "the other sheep."
Paul had the same vision. He talked about "the regions
beyond," the unoccupied areas. He said he wanted to go to
Spain and to Rome. He, too, realized that the Gospel had
to be taken to "all the world."
Do you know that the whole of North Africa was at one
time evangelized and that hundreds of Christian churches
dotted the landscape? Do you realize that some of our greatest
theologians came from North Africa in the early centuries of
the Christian era? But what happened? North Africa became
Mohammedan and for hundreds of years there was hardiy
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
43
a trace of Christianity left. The candles burned lower and
lower until at last they burned out and the light that had
shone so brightly was extinguished. How explain it?
me tell you.
The religious leaders and theologians in North Africa got
into controversy one with another and instead of preaching the
Gospel and evangelizing, they started theological discussions
and argued with each other over Christian doctrine.
should they have done? Thev should have gone to the next
towns south and then the next towns south of those. And what
would have happened? Within a very short time they would
have reached Capetown, and the whole of Africa would have
been evangelized hundreds of years ago. Africa might have
been sending missionaries to Europe and even to America.
That, my brethren, may happen bere. Yea, it is happen-
ing here. There are churches today in the United States and
Canada ás well as in Great Britain, Australia, and New Zea-
land-hundreds of them-that have become mere social clubs,
and if the Church of Jesus Christ does not awaken and give
the Gospel to the whole world, what bappened to Africa will
happen here.
"The light that shines farthest, shines brightest
nearest home."
"THE FIELD IS THE WORLD"
"But," you ask, "why go before all have been saved here?
There is so much to be done at home. Why not complete the
work in the homeland before going to the foreign field?"
Everywhere I go that question is asked. Let me answer it by
asking three or four others:
FIRsT.—Why did David Livingstone leave Scotland and go
to Africa before everyone in Scotland had become a Christian?
Why? There are still thousands in Scotland who have not
ever yet decided for Christ. And yet, years ago, Livingstone
left his own land and went to dark, benighted Africa. I ask
you-why?
DECOND.—Why did William Carey leave England and gi
• India before everyone in England had been Christianized

44
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
Why? There are still some in England who have got been
won to Christ.
THIRD. -Why did Judson leave America and go to Burma
before everyone in America had been brought to Christ?
Why? There are still a few in the States who have not been
Christianized.
LASTIY.—Why did the Apostie Paul leave for Europe
before Palestine had heard the Gospel? Why? Paul, you
remember, deliberately turned from his own country and went
to our forefathers in Europe in order to evangelize them.
Why, I ask, did he do it? Ought he not to have stayed in
Palestine, at least until they had heard the message?
My friends, there is only one answer and I give it in the
words of the Bible: "The feld is the world."
The United
States of America is not the world. Great Britain is not the
The field is the whole world. You never in your life
heard of a farmer working in one little corner of his field. The
farmer works the whole field. The United States is but one
corner; Canada is but a little corner. The wild, the whole
world, must be evangelized. And since "the field is the world,"
we have no choice but to go to every part of it. The work is
one and it must be done,
not corner by corner, but as
The tobacco firms have their agents in the most distant
places.
Millions of cigarettes are given away to create new
appetites. Do you mean to say that the reason for it is
because there is no longer any demand at home? Of course
not. The demand here especially since woren have stepped
down from the high pedestal upon which they once stood and
have taken to cigarette smoking-is greater than ever.
the tobacco firms are already sending their missionaries into
foreign lands. They want new markets. They are wiser than
we are, for that, after all, is God's plan and we would do
well to emulate them. It has never been God's will that we
should remain at home until the work here is finished. He
wants us to go to the entire world, to work the whole field
simultaneously.
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
45
Do you know what you are saying when you say you do not
believe in missions? You are saying that Paul made a mis-
take; that he should have left your forefathers in Europe,
pagans; that it would have been better it ce had stayed at
home in Palestine so that you might have remained in
heathenism. Is that what you think? Are you sorry you are
not still a heathen? You must be if you do not believe in
THE BACK ROWS
Do you remember when the Lord Jesus Christ fed the
five thousand? Do you recall how He had them sit down, row
upon row, on the green grass? Then do you remember how He
took the loaves and fishes and blessed them and then broke
them and gave them to His disciples? And do you remember
how the disciples started at one end of the front row and went
right along that front row giving everyone a helping? Then
do you recall how they tured right around and started back
along that front row again, asking everyone to take a second
helping? Do you remember?
No!—a thousand times—no! Had they done that, those in
the back rows weld have been a mo
vigorously. "Here," they would have been saying,
back here. Give us a helping. We have not had any yet.
We are starving: it isn't right; it isn't fair. Why should
those people in the front rows have a second helping before
we have had a first?'
And they would have been right. We talk about the second
blessing. They haven't had the first blessing yet. We talk
about the second coming of Christ. They haven't heard about
the first coming yet. It just isn't fair.
"Why should anyone
hear the Gospel twice before everyone has heard it once?" You
now as well as I do, that not one individual in that entire
company of five thousand men, besides women and children,
got a second helping until everyone had had a first helping.
I have never known a minister to have any trouble with the
back rows. All his trouble comes from the front rows. Those

46
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
in the front rows are
over-fed and they develop spiritual
indigestion. They tell him how much to feed them; when to
feed them; when to stop feeding them; how long to feed
them; what kind of food to give them, etc. etc., and if he
doesn't do it, they complain and find fault. If a minister had
any sense, he would leave the front rows for a while and let
them get hungry for once in their lives and go to the back
rows, and then when he retunted they would be ready to accept
his ministry and there would be no murmuring or complaining.
My friends, I have been with the back rows. I have seen
the countless millions in those back rows famishing for the
Bread of Life. Is it right? Should we be concentrating on
the front rows? Ought we not rather to be training the front
• rows to share what they have with the back rows, and thus
reach them with the Gospel, those for whom nothing has been
prepared?
Do you know that the greatest thing a church can do for
new man; for no one can see the need with his own eyes and
ever be the same again. It will do something to hira. He will
Churches everywhere realize its importance and do it. Let him
see the back rows. Let hia see thera for himself. Let him see
them waiting in darkness and midnight gloom for the Gospel.
DR. DUFF'S APPEAL
Dr. Alexander Dutt, tbat great veteran missionary to India,
returned to Scotland to die, and as he stood before the General
Assembly of the Presbyterian Church, be made his appea., but
there was no response. In the midst of his appeal he fainted
and was carried off the platform. The doctor bent over him
and examined his heart. Presently he opened his eyes.
"Where am I?" he cried. "Where an IP"
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
47
"Lie still," said the doctor. "Your beart is very weak."
"But," exclaimed the old warrior,
"I must finish my appeal.
Take me back. Take me back. I haven't finished my appeal
yet."
"Lie still," said the doctor again, "you are too weak to go
But the aged missionary struggled to his feet, his determina-
tion overcoming his weakness; and with the doctor on one side
and the moderator on the other side, the old white-haired
warrior was led again to the platform, and, as he mounted the
pulpit steps, the entire Assembly rose to do him honour. Then
he continued his appeal.
"When Queen Victoria calls for volunteers for India," he
exclaimed,
"hundreds of young men respond; but when King
Jesus calls, no one goes."
"Is it true," he asked,
Then he paused. Again he spoke.
"that Scotland has no more sons to
give for India?"
Again he paused. "Very well," he con-
"If Scotland has no more young men to send to India,
then, old and decrepit though I am, I will go back, and even
though I cannot preach, I can lie down on the shores of the
Ganges and die, in order to let the peoples of India know that
there is at least one man in Scotland who cares enough for
their souls to give his life for them."
in a moment young men, all over the assembly, sprang to
"I'll go! I'll go! Ill go!"
Dr. Duff.
Why should anyone hear the Gospel twice before everyone
