The Passion for Souls
Chapter 9: THE NEED OF THE HOUR

HERE there is no vision the people perish"
Proverbs xxix. I8). How true! Multitudes there
ate who throng our cities on every side who are
perishing simply because we have no vision. Christless masses
for whom Jesus died may never hear God's message of sal-
vation unless we get a vision. Our great centres of population
for which we are responsible do not know the Gospel of
God's grace because we, His followers, are without a vision.
What are we going to do about it? When, oh when, will we
get the burden and become conscious of our responsibility?
True indeed is the verdict, "Where there is no vision, the
people perish."
Saug in our little nest, comfortable amid our surroundings,
satisfied with our handful of overfed followers, we hold our
services, preach our sermons and seem to have no care, no
for the perishing multitudes around us. Yet God
never told sinners to come to us. He told us to go to thera.
Why then do we blame them for not coming in when the
real blame is ours for not going out? God help us. "Where
here is no vision the people perish."
The world goes out into the open to attract attention.
Theatres are built on the most prominent corners and brightly
lighted, whereas the church, only too often, selects a back
street, puts up a small building, installs dull lighting, and
then wonders why the people do not attend.
"The children
of this world are wiser than the children of light." Every
city needs a large, centrally located evangelistic work, brightly
Illuminated, easily accessible, capable of attracting the passer-
by, and with a real live, evangelistic programme, a programme

THE PASSION FOR SOULS
geared to arouse the indifferent, awaken sinners and point
them heavenward. Without such a vision, the people are
bound to perish.
All that is needed to bring to pass such a God-given vision
is faith, or should I say, faith and
pains. Faith and pams
will do anything. A God-given vision, a God-given faith,
plus pains; namely, bard, sacrificial work, will accomplish
the apparently impossible. Carey's motto sums it all up.
"Expect great things from God; attempt great things for
God." You cannot expect great things from God until you
attempt great things for God. Get God's vision ated then work
it out.
"All things are possible to him that believeth." "With
God all things are possible." "Have faith in God."
We are living in days of awful apostasy. In my journeys
through Burope, and more recently across Canada and the
United States, I have been burdened regarding the religious
situation and outlook as never before. The professing church,
as prophesied, is fast becoming apostate. Many are turning
from the faith. This means that the entire world has now
become one vast mission field. The message is almost as much
needed here at home as it is abroad. Thousands of regular
church goers never hear the Gospel.
In many pulpits today,
such statements as these are heard
and that from ordained ministers of the Gospel: "I no longer
preach the entire acceptance of the Bible. I do not preach
the heaven and hell of the Bible and I do not know any
worthwhile preachers who do. My education forbids my
acceptance of the miracles of the Bible. I do not believe in
the doctrine of salvation by blood. Thank God, I am not
i so the her ter the chit it it he rod onl
proclaimed once again the mighty soul-transforming truths
of the old Book?
General Booth wrote "In Darkest England." God bas been
impressing upon my heart that terrible statement, "Behold,
darkuess shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people"
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
(Isaiah Ix. 2). This is trze today, not only in the foreign
field. but here at home as well. People on every side are in
almost total darkness, so far as God's salvation is concerned.
Only here and there do we find a pulpit where the Gospel is
preached, the new birth emphasized, salvation made plain
and an invitation given. Altar services and inquiry Iooms
are seldom in evidence.
Services are becoming more and
more formalistic. In many churches the minister preaches as
thoagh everyone in his audience was already saved and bound
for heaven, yet in every congregation there are those who
have never been born again.
Oh, for the preaching of Bunyan, Baxter, Aileen, Edwards,
Wesley, Whitfield and Finney; preaching that made sinuers
tremble and cry aloud under a fearful burden of sin and guilt.
May the Lord raise up such men again, men who, realizing the
awful seriousness and responsibility of their calling, and laying
aside all minor subjects, will tearlessly proclaim the great
fundamentals of the Faith, that in these closing days of the
age a clear and unmistakable testimony may be given. There
is no other preaching, no other message, worth the time and
Everywhere there are some who are faithful. Praise God
for that. I am not classing all alike. I am speaking only of
the general condition, and in proof of what I say, I herewith
submit the following starting statement which speaks for
itself: "It is reported that not a single convert was made last
year in IT,394 churches in the United States. The official year
books of the Presbyterian, Northern Baptist and Methodist
Episcopal Churches show that 3,25g Presbyterian churches
Talled to secure a convert and that 500 of the others had
only one convert each." This, my friends, is one of the most
startling signs of the times that we have yet noted. Our
churches are becoming social centres. What a challenge to
those of us who believe in the necessity of the new birth.
oo much time is given to religious controversy.
hould we be on the defensive? Controversy nas never beer
profitable. The truths of the Bible do not need to be defended;

o4 THE PASSION FOR SOULS

they only need to be proclaimed. The Bible will defend itself.
Tt will survive long after its critics are dead and gone. We
need a positive message. It was because of controversy in
North Africa thot the light went out, and it will happen here
too, unless we change our methods.

Oh then, let us keep to our one great task of geiting out the
Gospel both at home and abroad, Let us work together in the
unity of the Spirit. If we cannot agree on anything else, we
can egiee on evangelism: We all believe that the Gospel is thé
power of God unto salvation. Then let us preach it. Atheists
have never been convinced by argument.

“No Attack! No Defence!” has always been my motto and
it has stood me in good stead. I know of no better and 1
would strongly recommend that every minister make it his.

‘We are living, according to the Scripture, in the Laodicean
days of the church, Therefore, the church itself must be

ized. There must be a new call to separation from the
world and whole-hearted devotion to Jesus Christ. How any-
one who bas been born again can remain in a church that is
nothing more than 2 club, is beyond me. Compromise is
always condemned in God’s Word. ‘The darkness must be
Gispelled. How else can we meet the fearftl apostasy of the
day. Tn unity there is strength.

‘The onemy is upoa us. The storm is gathering and is about
to break. Nothing but the preaching of the Gospel in the
power of the Holy Spirit can stem the tide. Then let us
evangelize, Let us go where the people are, and, with the
best Gospel music, the best testimonies and the best messages,
let us attract the Christless masses. Let us plan a bright,
evangelistic progremme' and win them to our Saviour.

‘Did you ever read Prov. xxiv. rz, 12? Searching words,
these, Look at them if you will: “If thoa forbear to deliver
them that are drawn unto death, and those that are ready to
be slain; if thou sayest, Behold, we knew it not; doth not He
that pondereth the heart consider it? and He that keepeth thy
soul, doth not He know it? and shall not He sender to every
man according to his works?”

THE PASSION FOR SOULS O5

What a striking statement! Who can read it and not be
convicted? if men are threatened with death and we fail to
wam them, we are to blame. We may plead ignorance. We
may say that we did not now it. Tt will avail us nothing.
We can know. We can find ont the need. Such an excuse,
God will not accept. We must sound the alarm. We must tell
tenn of their danger. And if we don’t, we are guilty of their

This, my brethren, is the need of the hour. May God give
us the vision, lest the people perish and we be held responsible,
