The Passion for Souls
Chapter 6: DARE WE IGNORE THE CHALLENGE OF THE UNFINISHED

TASK?
to fifteen. They read as follows:
"For whosoever shall
d call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. How
then shall they call on Him in whom they have not believed?
And how shall they believe in Him of whom they have not
heard? And how shall they hear without a preacher? And hov
shall they preach, except they be sent! As it is written, How
beautiful are the feet of them that preach the gospel of peace,
and bring glad tidings of good things!"
Here you have the four
"hows" of God's Word. First there
is the promise, "call" and "be saved." But to call, they must
beileve. To believe, they must hear. To hear, someone must
preach. To preach, he must be sent. Thus God puts the res-
ponsibility on us. If we send, the missionary can preach. If
he preaches, the heathen can hear and believe. It he believes,
he can call. If he calls, he will be saved. But it starts with
us. We must first of all send.
THE MOST IMPORTANT WORK
What, then, is the most important work of the hour? Is it
to pray for revival, to lead God's children into the deeper
life, to instruct them in the truths of the Bible? I think
not.
Lin i to establish Bible Schools and Chrisian colleges, to
build hospitals, orphanages and asylums? Or to erect new
church buildings and repair old ones? It is not.
58
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
59
Is it then to distribute Bibles and New Testaments,
circulate Gospel Eterature; to support the many home move-
ments that abound on every side? 1 do not think so.
Is it to work among children and the youth of our country;
to back philanthropic enterprises; to
eradicate disease and
minister to the unfortunate? Again, I answer, No.
What, then, is the most important work of the hour? It is
to carry out our Lord's last orders. It is to give His Gospel
trends neared tries at nantes in he Go yeat all
irends, is more important than anything else.
the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature" (Mark
By this, and this alone, we must judge all spirituality, all
Bible knowledge, all doctrinal and theological discussions. If
we are truly spiritual, if we are real Bible students, if our
doctrnes are Scriptural, we will put world evangelism first;
we will give, and give liberally,
to missions. All our Bible
knowledge, all our spirtuality, all our doctrinal standards
are nothing but bake-believe, unless we are putting fist
things first, and we are only deceiving ourselves.
Let those who do not have the vision, those who do not
know God's programme, let them give to the many worthy
causes here at home; but let those of us who have heard
God's call, let us concentrate on pioneer work in the Regions
Beyond. Let us put our money into one thing and one thung
oriy, that of reaching the remaining thousand unevangelized
tribes with the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
There are those without a vision, who are moved by appeals
and give a little here and a little there, and have but little
to show for it, whereas they could put all they give back of
the most important work of the hour and see a whole new
tribe or a whole new country evangelized. There are men
who could have the untold joy of supporting fifty or a hundred
missionaries in pioneer territory, who are today giving to a
hundred and one nearby enterprises, to which thousands who
do not have the God-given vision of world evangelism are glad
to contribute. The home work will never lack.

6o
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
We have but one great tas? and God's Word,
"his blood
will I require at thine band"
, will apply to us if we withhold
the Gospel. If the King is to reign, we must finish the task.
He is counting on us.
How long, I wonder, are we going ic
Keep Him waiting? We should lay everything else aside and
concentrate on this one great objective, the completion of the
evangelization of the world in our own generaton.
It you cannot go yourself, you will have to send a substi-
tute. Why not put your prayers, your talents and gifts, and
your money, back of substitutes, and have your own repre-
sentatives on the Foreign Field? We will never be satisfied
until we have five hundred substitutes in the Regions Beyond.
That is our prayer. That is our vision. We live for nothing
else. Our Lord's last words ring in our ears, "The Gospel must
first be published among all nations."
Paul could have frst evangelized Palestine, but he didn't.
Countless thousands had never even heard the Gospel in
Jerusalem and Judea, yet he left them and went to Europe.
He could bave built churches in the homeland and established
the work at home first; but he left all and went with the
Gospel to those in distant lands. And thank God he did, for
if he had developed the home work first, we might have still
been heathen.
Oh, my friend, let me uge you in the few short years that
remain, to turn from everything else, to bend every effort
o send out the Gospel, for this is the one and only task ina
Tesus left His Church to do. This, and this alone, is the mos
important work of the hour.
LANGUAGES AND TRIBES STILL UNREACHED
Do you know how many languages there are in this world
of ours? Let me tell you. At the present time there are at
languages have the Word of God, or any portion of it? Up
to the present time only 1, 185. How many, then, does that
leave without a single portion of God's Book? It leaves
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
6I
1,78g. Think of it, if you will. After nearly two. thousand
years of raissionary work and world-wide evangelism, tere
are still 1,78g languages into which the Word of God has
never yet been translated. And what does God say? "Faith
cometh by hearing and hearing by the Word of God." "How
shall they believe except they hear?" But how can they hear
if they do not have God's Word?
It has been found that there are still over 2,000 tribes with-
out the Gospel. Moreover, these tribes have been located. We
know where they are. I want you to think of them, it you
will, as I mention them, and remember, no missionary is
working among them and none of them have the Word of
God. Ås a matter of fact, they have never even heard the
name of Jesus.
There are 626 tribes in New Guinea, 521 in the South Sea
Islands, 350 in Africa, 300 in South America, 200 in Australia
(Aborigines), 100 in India, 6o in Indo-China and 6o in the
Phippines. Hence,-at least 2,000 tribes are still waiting in
darkness and midnight gloom for the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
In Brazil alone there are 1,500,000 pure blood Indians and
more than 10o tribes. Bolivia has almost 1,000,000 pure blood
Indians. Peru has an Indian population of 2,500,000. In
Colombia there are 100,000 Indians, mostly in a savage and
primitive condition.
There are also 500,000 highland Indians
in a semi-civilized state.
But how are they to be reached? Only by the young people
of our churches, our Bible Schools and our Seminaries. It is
the young who can go. Moverents like Inter-Varsity Fellow-
ship and Youth for Christ must challenge thera. Mission Boards
everywhere are pleading for workers.
That is why I toured Great Britain and appealed to the
young people there until 1,200 of them responded. That is why
I have gone all over the United States and Canada.
labourers are few." We must have more. That is why I am
giving myself first and foremost to missionary work. The
world must be evangelized. Our only hope is in the young
people. Unless they go, the job will never be done for no one

THE PASSION FOR SOULS
else can do it. God is calling the young. The youth of our
country must respond.
Let us remember that practically all the disciples were young
men. Jesus chose them in their youth. They had their lives
before them and they lived them for God. May we, too, accept
the challenge. May we give our best. God had an only Son
and He made Him a missionary. Can we do less?
There are many who would go if they could be pioneers.
They have read the life stories of men like Livingstone, Moffat,
Carey, Judson, etc. My friends, may I say that the Missionary
Societies are calling for a thousand pioneers right now, for
there are still a thousand tribes to be evangelized. Why not
concentrate on the unoccupied areas? Why not be a trail-
When I was in Sumatra I heard of a town to which no one
had gone, and I penetrated back through the jungles until
I reached it. Never will I forget the thrill that was mine as I
crossed the threshold of that town, realizing that I was in all
probability the first messenger of the Cross to have done so.
If I were a young man today, I would not want to go to a
field where others had laboured, except to become "oriented."
I would ask, as Livingstone did, to be sent to new fields, for
I would want to be the first to reduce the language to writing,
translate portions of the Bible, and give the people the Gospel.
I, too, would be a pioneer;
Why waste your life here in America or Great Britain? Why
settle down to the hundrum and the monotony of making
money? Why not get a vision? You can go where no one
else has gone. You can invest your life in something really
worth while. If you stay here, you will be treading on some-
one else's toes. If you go out there, you will have plenty of
elbow room. Why not live a life really worth while? You,
too, can be a pioneer.
Oh, I know what you are saying. I have heard it said again
and again. You are quoting Acts i. 8; but you are not quot-
ing it right. This is the way you quote it:
"Ye shali be wit-
nesses unto Me first in Jerusalem, then in Judea; after that
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
in Samaria, and last of all, to the uttermost part of the earth."
But that is not what it says. Let me quote it for you now:
shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all
Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the
earth." It is not,
" but "both." And what does the!
word both mean? It means at one and the same time, does
it not? In other words, we are to evangelize jerusalema, and,
at one and the same time, Judea, and Samaria, and the utter-
most part of the earth.
We are not to wait until we have
completed the work here, before going there. We are to work
both fields; the home and the foreign, together.
May I remind you of the fact that for the most part there
is only the United States and Canada left to do it. Germany
at one time sent out many missionaries. Germany can do
nothing today. Great Britain was in the forefront of the battle
for decades; today Great Britain can make but few advances.
Sweden and Switzerland can do very little. We are confronted,
therefore, with the appalling tact that we can only look to the
United States and Canada to evangelize the world. Fow
much then depends upon us!
HOME OR FOREIGN-WHICH?
Do you realize that all can hear here, if they want to?
Since the advent of radio, all anyone has to do, even in the
most remote place, is to tune in on a Gospel programme and
listen to the message. But I have been in countries where there
are millions of people and no radio, either sending stations
or receiving sets; and where the people could not hear if they
Why then be so concerned for those in the home-
land, who for the most part are not interested, and so little
concerned for those in distant lands who would be interested
if they had a chance?
I would rather spend money any day on the publication of
foreign booklets than on those in the English language. Out
there, they will read anything. Here, gospel literature in most
cases is lightly tossed aside. Only recently the students of a

64
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
well known Bible School took their stand on the street corners
and gave away thousands of tracts. In a few moments the
street was littered. Most of the tracts had been thrown away.
Many of then had been torn in two. I have never known
those in foreign lands to tear up, or even refuse to accept,
tracts or booklets when handed to them. In most cases they
Ieceive them courteously and thank the giver, and whether
in street cars, buses, or trains, they will immediately read
them. In Spain I have had my car surrounded by men and
women, stretching out their hands for the gospel tracts I was
giving away, so eager were they to got them.
Let anyone take an automobile, load it with tracts and drive
through France or Italy, or through Cuba and Haiti, and just
give out gospel tracts, and he will have a ministry that will
count for eternity, even if he is table to preach in. the lan-
guage of the people. God uses the printed page. That is why
I invest so much money in it. I know of no better way to
evangelize the Russian people, both in Europe and South
America, and for that matter, wherever they are to be found,
than by giving them gospel booklets, for they will read any-
thing: Nearly a dozen of my own booklets have been trans.
lated into Russian,
as well as into a dozen or more other
languages, and scattered in tens of thousands, and I am
continually hearing of conversions as a result.
if you will, of the hundreds upon hundreds of
diferent organizations here at home for the propagation of
the Gospel. Then think of the few in foreign lands. It just
does't seem fair. We have concentrated on the home work
and have forgotten those for whom nothing has been prepared.
What would you do if you should see ten men lifting a log and
if nine were on one end and one on the other? Where world
you help? Why on the end where the one was lifting, would
you not? Need I say more? It is the foreign field that needs
our help most.
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
65
THREE DIFFERENT GROUPS
I would like to challenge three different groups. First of
all, the senders, then the prayers, and last but not least, the
go-ers. All three are necessary.
Someone must send; money is necessary. There are those
who will bave to hold the ropes at home. And if you, my
friend, cannot go, then perhaps God wants you to be a sender
anci to see that another goes in your place. Your part is to
earn money and make it possible for someone else to go. And
remember, you will share equally in the reward.
Then there are the prayers. It may be that you cannot
caru money and that you only have sufficient for your own
needs. You may never be able to send another; but you can
be a pray-er. You can spend o. little time in Africa, and
India, and China, each day. You can get a list of missionaries
and pray for them. That may be your responsibility, and if
it is, woe betide you if you shirk it. You, too, may win a
reward by faithfully praying for those who have gone; thus
you cam have a share in their work.
Then, of course, there are the go-ers, and if you are healthy
and strong, if you have or can get the necessary training, and
if you are prepared, you can go. The urge will come upon
you as you pray about your life's work and you will soon know
if God is calling. I challenge you to the greatest work in the
world. I appeal to you to go if you can. There is potting
like it. Why, the missionaries are God's aristocrats. They are
the aristocracy of the church. You will be associating with the
finest people on earth.
How will you know God's will? Let me tell you. Start now
praying about your life's work. Pray every day. Set aside
time for prayer and cry out, "Lord, what wilt Thou have me
Then, as you pray, read missionary biography.
Brainerd, Singh, Livingstone, Carey, Moffat, MacKay, Jud-
son, Gilmour, Paton, Slessor, Chalmers, Morrison, Duff,
Martyn, Williams, Taylor, Geddie, and read two or three
chapters each day. That will put you into the atmosphere of

6б
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
missions. Then, as you read and pray, not forgetting, of
course, God's Word, there will come to your heart a convic-
tion, an urge that God wants you to serve Him in some foreign
land. If not, the burden will lift. That urge is the voice of the
Spirit. Heed it, and you will never go astray.
When you are sure of God's will do not let Satan turn you
aside. Ile will if he can. Your own friends and loved ones
may become your greatest stumbling blocks. Be on your
guard. Many a girl who has been called has marned a man
who was not going, and vice-versa, with the result that God's
plan has been missed. Listen, young people, you have no rigat
to even keep company with anyone except someone who is
travelling in your direction. Do that and you will never make
a mistake. God has already chosen your lite partner for you
and His choice is ever so much better than yours. Don't let
Satan turn you aside.
JOHN CHINAMAN AND THE ATHEIST
John Chinaman was at one time questioned by an atheist:
"What are you going to do irst, John Chinaman," inquired
the atheist, "when you get to heaven?"
"First of all," responded John Chinamaa, "I am going, to
and une or less Che a tand thankid fat wil you do
next?"
John Chinaman thought for a moment before he answered.
"Next," he replied, "I am going to search until I find the
missionary who came to my country and told me about Jesus
Christ, and then thank him for coming."
"Yes, and what then?" inquired the atheist, with a mocking
"Then," said John Chinaman, "I am going to find the one
who gave the money so that the missionary could come, and
I could bear about Jesus and be saved, for I want to thank
With that the atheist walked away and was seen no more.
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
67
My friend, you may be the one who sent the missionary or
you may be the missionary who went. I wonder if some Johu
Chinaman will come up to you when you get to heaven and
thank you for what you did. Will there be anyone from the
heathen world who will recognize you and express his or her
gratitude? You will have to decide. The task has not yet been
finished. It is now up to you to do your part to finish it.
"How shall they hear without a preacher, and how shall
they preach except they be sent?"
