The Passion for Souls
Chapter 5: WILL CHRIST RETURN TO BARTE BEFORE THE WORLD HAS BEEN

EVANGELIZED?
to Mark, the
thirteenth chapter and the tenth verse, you will find these
- words: "The Gospel must first be published among all
nations." Then if you will turn to the Gospel of Matthew,
the twenty-fourth chapter and the fourteenth verse, you will
find the same statement, but with something added. It reads
like this:
"This Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached
*ol comon at on hees al then want to clarity my
I am not asking the question, "Will Christ return to
the Air?" In fact, I am not speaking about the Rapture at all.
My question is:
"Will Christ return to earth? Will He come
to establish His Kingdom and reign? Will He retur to put
an end to this Age and usher in the next? Will He return
to earth before the world has been evangelized?"
Note also, if you will, that I am not asking if He will
return to earth before the world has been Christianized. The
word I have used is "evangelized", and there is a world of
difference between Christianization and Evangelization. To
understand the message, therefore, you must understand the
subject: "Will Christ return to carth before the world has been
evangelized?"
When I first read the passages to which I have drawn your
attention, and especially the one in Mark, I was puzzled. -
Why, I asked myself, did Jesus use the word "first"? Why
"The Gospel must be published
That would have made sense. That
I could have understood. But that is not what He said.
!
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
49
He interjected the word "first." He stated that the Gospel
first be published among
all nations. What did He
mean? Why did He use the word "first"?
THE FIRST REASON
To begin with, I think He wanted to point out the wrgency
of the task. He wanted to say that before we did anything else,
we were to evangelize the world.
This generation can only reach this generation. This genera-
tion cannot reach the last generation because the heathen of
the last generation are all dead and gone. The Christians of
the last generation were responsible for the heathen of the
last generation. This generation cannot reach the next genera-
tion because when the heatben of the next generation will have
been born, the Christians of this generation will have died. The
only generation that we can reach is our generation and unless
we evangelize this generation it will never be evangelized.
In our Canadian Northwest we have great harvest fields.
Every autumn special trains,
loaded with harvesters, are
rushed to these fields. Why the haste? Why the hurry? Why
not take our time? Why not do it later? Why must it be
done now? Because it is now or never. The harvest will not
wait. There may be another, but this harvest will be lost, and
lost forever. It must be garnered in within the limits of a
single harvest season or it will perish. Hence the haste. So
it is with the Lord's harvest. There may be those who will
reach a future generation, but this generation will be lost and
will perish unevangelized. Hence, the urgency.
Some one generation must complete the evangelization of
the world. Why not ow generation? Why leave it to another?
The last generation did not do it, and the next may not. It
must be completed, I say, within the limits of a single genera-
tion. Why not within the limits of our own? We can do it
But, you say, if it has already taken nearly two thousand
years to evangelize thirty-five per cent of the human race, how
D

5°
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
can the remaining sixty-five per cent be evangelized within
the next few years? Will it not take another two thousand
years to complete the task? I think not. With our speeding-
up methods of evangelization, it can be done in this generation.
With our modern inventions it is possible.
MODERN METHODS
Today we are using radio broadcasting stations and we are
placing them in strategic centres throughout the world. Over
these stations we will be able to broadcast the Gospel in the
languages of the people to multiplied thousands, and reach
more in a single hour than we formerly could in years.
We have public address systems. I think of a missionary
in North Africa who placed a loud speaker on top of his roof
garden and from it broadcast the Gospel to the whole town.
Personally, he never could have penetrated behind the closed
doors where the Mohammedan women were kept in confine-
ment; nor could be have compelied the Mosier men to listen.
But his message from the roof-top pierced the walls and doors
of all the houses and reached everywhere in the entire town.
That method will evangelize anywhere, and thus speed up the
getting out of the Gospel.
We are using transcriptions today, thousands of them. They
are made by the natives themselves and even though the lan-
guage bas never been reduced to writing and the missionary
does not know a word of it, these transcriptions can be played
in the roost remote villages and hundreds of eager Listeners
will crowd around to hear the singing and the messages in
their own native tongue. The record says the same thing over
and over again, until the people know it by heart. They can-
not argue with it. All they can do is to hear it and then accept
or reject the message.
Aeroplanes are being used today, and in many mountainous
districts where it used to take the missionary six weeks to
reach his field of service, it now takes him two hours, and
when he arrives he is fresh and ready for work. The long,
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
5I
tiresome trip through forests, mountains and valleys is a
thing of the past on many fields. He can trave. trom the
homeland to the foreign field in a few hours and arrive ready
for work. If be is sick, he can be brought home quickly for
an emergency operation. Aeroplanes are solving many of the
problems of the missionary.
I am looking forward to the time when small air-cooled
_ rooms will be built and shipped to the mission fields of the
tropics, so that the missionaries can have a place in which to
study and sleep and thus escape the excessive heat. Such a
room would add tremendously to the health and usefulness
of the missionary.
With all these methods for the getting out of the Gospel, it
should be quite possible to complete the evangelization of the
world within the limits of our own generation, even though
there are still more than a thousand tribes to be evangelized.
It is the urgency of the task that must move us to action.
Had the Church realized just how urgent it is, the world
would have been evangelized long, long ago.
This means that the one and most important work of the
Church is to give the Gospel to the whole wide world in the
shortest possible time. The sooner it is done, the sooner He
will retura to set up His Kingdom. Discussing prophetic sub-
jects will not bring Him back, but doing the job will. There-
fore, "why speak ye not a word of bringing back the King?"
THE SECOND REASON
In the second place, I think He wanted to point out that
the world had to be evangelized before He Himself would
return to reign.
If you will read the entire chapter, you will discover that
it has to do with the End-time of this present dispensation
and the ushering in of the Golden Age. But as He relates the
events, one by one, suddenly He pauses and He says this:
"But first, before these things can come to pass; before the
Age can end and the new Age be born, first, this Gospel must

52
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
be published among all nations." In Matthew's Gospel you
have these words added: "Then shall the end come.
" That
makes it clear. The meaning cannot be mistaken. The Age
will end when the world has been evangelized.
In other words, before Jesus Christ will return to earth to
reign in millennial splendour, power, and glory, His Gospe
nust be proclaimed to every tribe, tongue, and nation. There
must be some in heaven from every race, according to Revela-
tion; hence, our greatest obligation is to give His Gospel to all
mankind. Acts i.
8 says it will be done.
Matthew, I know, speaks of the Gospel of the Kingdom. I
am preaching both the Gospel of the grace of God and the
Gospel of the Kingdom, constantly. The Gospel of the grace
of God is the good news that Jesus died for sinners.
Gospel of the Kingdom is the good news that Jesus is coming
back to reign. Both messages must be proclaimed; and whether
it is the Gospel of the grace of God or the Gospel of the King-
com, it makes no difference. In both cases, it is the Gospel,
the good news.
And it must be published before the end
Oh, that our statesmen knew the programme! They are
trying to get rid of war and bloodshed, to abolish poverty and
sickness; and, as far as possible, to eliminate death. They
hold their Peace Conferences: they sign their pacts; they spend
their money for relief; and they think they can accomplish
their purpose. How little they know!
If they knew God's plan they would organize and send out
the largest army of missionaries they could muster, tens of
thousands of there. They would place their radio stations at
the disposal of Christian agencies. They would use their news-
papers for the publishing of the Gospel; and in a few years
they would succeed in reaching every man, woman, and child;
and the whole world would, be evangelized.
Then Christ would be heie. He would set up His Kingdom.
War would be no more; sickness and poverty would be gone;
seldom would there be a death for man would live his allotted
life. The millennium would be established and man's rule
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
53
ended. Christ would take over the reins of government and
rule this world in righteousness. There would be prosperity
never known before.
But the rulers do not know and the church struggles on.
The world still waits to be evangelized and Christ does not
return.. When, oh when, will we see God's plan? How long
must He wait before we get down to business and do the job?
A DANGEROUS HERESY
But I know what some are saying. I hear it everywhere.
They are saying: "This is not the task of the Church at all, the
Jews are to do it; we should leave it for them after we have
been raptured away."
I know of no heresy that can do more to cut the nerve of
missionary endeavour. Moreover, I know of no definite state-
ment in the entire Bible that would lead me to believe, for one
single moment, that the Jews are to evangelize the world
during the days of the great tribulation, as some people seem
to think. Were I to believe that I would fold my arms and
do notbing.
Do you mean to say that after the Holy Spirit has gone, and
we are told that He is to go when the Church goes, do you
mean to say that the lews can accomplish more in some seven
years or less, without the help of the Holy Spirit, in the midst
of persecution and martyrdom, than we bave been able to
accomplish in nearly two thousand years, with the Holy
Spirit's aid, when it has been easy to be a Christian? Prepos-
terous. Impossible!
Furthermore, if nothing is to be done until the Church has
been raptured, then only that one generation, the generation.
that will be living during the tribulation, will ever be evangel-
zed. Are you willing then that every other generation should
persh? Have you no concern for your own generation? Are
we going to allow this generation to be lost and be satisfiéd
if the last generation only, is evangelized? Paul's burden was
for the first generation of the Christian era.

54
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
Even if you are right, still I am going to do all I can, because
the job has to be done sometime. Everyone agrees on that.
Well then, the more I can do now the less the jews will have
to do then. But if you are wrong, what a tragedy! You will
have failed to do your part to evangelize the world and God
will hold you responsible. I believe it must be done now.
ONE THING ONLY
When Jesus left His disciples, nearly two thousand years
ago now, He gave Them but one task; namely, world evangel-
I can imagine Him talking to them something like
"I am going to leave you and I will be gone for a long
ime. While I am absent, I want you to do just one thing.
Give this Gospel of Mine to the entire world. See that every
nation, tongue, and tribe hears it, at least once."
Those were His instructions. That was the one thing He
told them to do, and they understood Him perfectly. But
what has the Church done during the years He has been
absent? Have we carried out His orders? Have we obeyed
As a maiter of fact, we have done everything else except
the one and only thing He told us to do. Jesus never told us
to build colleges,
universities, and seminaries, but we have
done it. He never told us to erect hospitals and asylumas and
homes for the aged. He never told us to build churches or to
organize Sunday Schools and Youth for Christ Rallies, but
we have done it. And we ought to have done it, for it is all
important and worthwhile.
But the one and only thing that He did tell us to do, is the
one and only thing that we have left undone. We have not
given His Gospel to the entire worid. We have not carried out
What would a man say who had called a plumber to fix his
water taps, if he should come home and End him painting the
side of his house? What could he say? Would he not expect
him to do what he had told him to do? Could the man satisfy
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
55
him by stating that he thought the house needed painting?
Of course not. Orders must be obeyed.
More than nineteen hundred years ago the Lord Jesus Christ
ascended to His Father's throne and sat down on His right
hand. But he has a throne of His own, the throne of His
father David, and He is the legal successor. Whoever heard
of a king, who had a throne of his own, who would be satisfied
to occupy another king's throne?
Christ wants to return. He longs to reign. It is His rigat.
Then why does He wait? He is waiting for you and me to
complete the task. He is waiting for us to do what He has
told us to do. Many a time He must say to Himself as He
sits there,
"How long, I wonder, are they going to keep Me
vaiting? When will they let Me come back? How soon can
I return to earth to sit on My throne and reign?"
THE WHOLE ESTATE
Here is an estate. The master tells his servants that he is
leaving, but that he will be returning. And while he is gone,
they are to bring the entire estate under cultivation.
They begin working around the house. They beautify the
gardens and flower-beds. Next year the weeds grow and again
they go to work, keeping the lawns in pertect condition.
Presently one of them remembers his master's orders.
go," be exclaims.
"Our master told us to bring the entire estate
under cultivation." And he prepares to leave.
"But," they
cry, "we cannot spare you. See how fast the weeds grow. We
need vou here." In spite of their protests, however, he leaves
and begins working in a far corner of the estate.
Later on, two others remember their lord's orders and in
spite of objections they, too, go and cultivate another part
of the estate.
At last their master returns. He is pleased as he looks at
the flower-beds and gardens and the lawns around his house.
But before rewarding his servants, he decides to explore the
rest of the estate and, as he does so, kis heart sinks for he sees

THE PASSION FOR SOULS
nothing but wilderness and marsh, and he realizes that there
has not even been an attempt made to cultivate it.
Finally he comes to the one man working all by himself in
a distant part of the estate and he rewards him richly. He
discovers the two in still another part and likewise rewards
them. Then he returs to headquarters where his servants are
waiting and expecting a reward; but his face indicates dis-
"Have we not been faithful?" they exclaim. "Look at these
flower-beds and gardens. Look at these lawns. Are they not
'beautiful? And have we not worked hard?"
" he replies,
"you have done your best. You have
been faithful. You have laboured diligently."
"Well then," they cry,
"why are you disappointed? Are
we not entitled to a reward?"
"There is one thing you have forgotten," he replies; "you
have forgotten my orders: I did not tell you to work the same
gardens and lawns again; and again, year after year. I told
you to bring the entire estate under cultivation, to cultivate
it at least once. That you did not do; in fact, you did not
even attempt to cultivate it, and when your companions in-
sisted upon going and doing their part, you objected. No,
there is no reward."
Many a one, I am afraid, is going to be disappointed. You
may be that one. You may have won many souls in your town.
You may have been most faithful to your church; but what
have you done for those in heathen darkness? Did you ever
think of going yourself?
Have you ever given your money
that someone else might go? Have you prayed? What part
have you had in the evangelization of the world Have you
obeyed orders? Have you done what you could to bring the
entire estate under cultivation? Or have you been satisfied
to work in your own community and let the rest of the world
If you want to hear Him say, "Well done, good and faithful
servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord," and if you want
to receive the promised révard, the diadem or the crown, you
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
had better get busy aud do what you can to publish His
Gospel among all nations, or you will be a missing Christian
in the day of rewards.
Go then and do your part. Either go yourself or sead some-
one else. There is something that you can do, and the time is
short. It was the whole estate that had to be cultivated, and
it is the whole world that must be evangelized.
"Go ye there-
fore into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every
creature." For remember,
"The Gospel must first be published
among all nations, and the shall the end come."
This then is His answer to their question.
"What shall be
THE sign of thy coming, and of the end of the age?" That
was what they wanted to know-THE sign preceding and
indicating the end. His answer to their question in verse 3
of Matthew xxiv is found in verse I4.
Here it is: "This
gospel shall be preached in all the world, for a witness unto
all nations; and THEN shall the end come." All His other
predictions indicate the approaching end; this one, THE end.
Hence also the word "first" in Mark XIn. IO.
These, then, are the two reasons for the use of the word
It is urgent.
There is no time to lose: It must be
iven primary consideration. It is God's programme: tirs
vorld evangelization; then, the reign of Christ. He will retur
to establish His Kingdom when all nations have heard the
Gospel. Let us, then, to our task; and may we never rest
uatil our work is done.
