The Passion for Souls
Chapter 1: SATAN'S DEFEAT

an expression of inquiry on his face.
"Great! the very best!" responded the Prince of
Alaska, who had just entered.
"Have any of the Eskimos heard yet?" questioned the eager
s though gloating over a recent victory.
'Any attempts?" questioned his lord in a tone of authority.
"Have any attempted to get in?"
"That they have, but their efforts were folled before tacy
int a word of the language!" replied the Prince, a note of
"How? Tell me. How came it?" Satan was all attention now.
"Why," began the Prince,
"I was roaming back and forth
within my domains, having penetrated far into the Arctic
Circle in order to visit one of the most isolated tribes, when
suddenly I was amazed to hear that two taissionaries were on
their way from across the water, that they had landed,
with their dog sleigks were already well into the heart of my
kingdom, Alaska, making for a large tribe of Eskimo just
within the Arctic Circle."
"Yes, and what didst thou do?" broke in Satan, impatient
"First of all, I gathered together the hosts of darkness under
my command and held a council. Many suggestions were
made. Finally it was agreed that the easiest way was to freeze
them to death.

I2
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
"Finding that they were that day leaving for the distant
tribe and that it would in all probability take them a full month
to cross the frozen ice fields that intervened, we at once began
"With hearts burdened to make the Message known, they
started. Manfully they 'mushed' along. But when about a
week out, suddenly one day their food sleigh ran over thin
ice, which broke beneath its weight, and was almost immedi-
ately lost.
"Weary and tired, they bravely plodded on only to realize
toat they were in a helpless condition, and still over three
weeks from their destination. They were new to the great
Northland, and were no match for it.
"Finally, when they were out of food, tired and weary in
body, and almost ready to give up, I gave the word of com-
mand, and in a short time the wind began to blow a hurricane,
the snow came down in a blinding blizzard, and before
morning, thanks to the fact that thou, O my lord, art the
Prince of the Powers of the Air, they were cold and stiff in
"Excellent! Splendid! Thou didst serve me well," com-
mented the fallen cherub, with a gratified expression on his
once beautiful countenance.
"And what hast thou to report?" he continued, turnung to
the Prince of Tibet, who had listened with evident satisfaction
to the conversation.
"I, too, have a story that will fill Your Majesty with delight,"
responded the one addressed.
"Ha! Has an attempt been made to invade thy kingdom
as well, my Prince?" inquired Satan with growing interest.
"That there has," responded the Prince.
"How? Tell me about it," commanded Satan, instantly 0д
"I was attending to my duties in the heart of Tibet," ex-
plained the Prince, "when news reached me of a Society
organized specially to get the Gospel to my kingdom. Thou
mayest well know, my lord, that I was at once on the alert.
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
I3
I called my forces together to discuss the whole situation, and
we presently agreed on a plan that promised success.
"With great determination, two men sent out by the Society
travelled across China and boldly passing over the border,
entered the Forbidden Land. We allowed them to advance
about three days journey; and then, just as it was growing
dark, two savage dogs, such as are found all over the country,
sprang upon them.
Most desperately they fought for their
lives, but finally one was dragged down and killed. The other;
protected by invisible forces which we were unable to over-
come, somehow escaped."
"Escaped!" cried Satan, making a hideous gesture. "Es-
caped! Did he get the Message to them?"
"No, my lord,
responded the Prince of Tibet, in a tone of
"He had no chance. Before he could learn a word
of the language, our hosts had him set upon by the natives
He was quickly tried and sentenced. Oh, it was
a scene that would have filled your majesty with delight. They
sewed him up in a wet yak skin and put him out in the sun
to bake. For three days he remained there, his bones slowly
cracking as the skin shrank, until finally life ceased."
The room had been filling fast while the Prince of Tibet was
speaking, and at the conclusion of his report, a great cheer
rose from the entire assembly, while all bowed to the majestic
Egure of Satan, still beautiful, in spite of the ravages of sin.
But a moment later, the cheering subsided, bushed by a
wave of Satan's hand.
"And what hast thou to report?" he asked, turning to an-
otber fallen angel.
"Art thou still master of Afghanistan, my
That 1 am, Your Majesty," replied the one addresse
though were it not for my faithful followers, I doubt if
would be so."
"Ah! Has an attempt been made on thy domains also?"
exclaimed Satan in a loud voice.
"Yes, my lord," responded the Prince. "But listen and |
will tell all."

THE PASSION FOR SOULS
With a wave of his hand for silence, he began:
"We watched their advance; there were four of them-all
zealous to make Hima mown.
"Thou knowest, my lord, of the sign that meets the traveller
just inside the border of my kingdom. It reads as follows:
"'It is absolutely forbidden to cross this border into Afghan-
istan territory?
"Well, they knelt down around it and prayed, but, in spite
of this, our valiant forces prevailed. Fifty feet from the siga,
on a pile of rocks, sits an Afghan guard, rifle in hand. Atter
praying. the little company stepped boldly over the border and
entered the Forbidden Land. The guard allowed them to ad-
vance twenty paces, then, like a flash of lightning, three shots
were fired and three of the company lay on the ground, two
of them dead, the third wounded. His comrade hastily dragged
the wounded man back to the border, where, after a short sick-
ness, he died, while he himself lost heart and fled from the
country."
Prolonged cheering followed this recital, and great joy
filled every heart, Satan's raost of all, for was he not still
in possession of the Closed Lands, and had he not triumphed
од every field? The Message, thanks to his countless hordes,
had still been kept out, nor had the dreaded Name yet been
beard.
"Wilt thou not tell us, oh, thou Mighty One, why thou art
o anxious to keep the knowledge from these our expires
Knowest thou not that the kingdoms of the Prince of India
the Prince of China and His Royal Highness the Prince of
Africa, are being invaded by streng forces, and that men are
turning to Christ every day?"
Ab, yes, full well I know. But listen all, and I will explan
vhy I am so jealous for the Closed Lands," answered Satan
while all bent forward to hear.
this one, " he began,
"This gospel of
the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness
unto all nations; and then shall the end come.' Now it is very
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
15
clear," he continued in a low tone, "that God is visiting the
to take out of them a people for his name,' and 'after
this, He says, 'I will return'; and the Great Cormission ina-
plies that disciples are to be made from among all nations.
"Now," he exclaimed with indignation, "Jesus Christ can-
not return to reign until every nation has heard the Good News,
for it reads, 'I beheld a great multitude, which no man could
number, oî all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues
are made, for not until the message of the Gospel has beer
proclained in Alaska, Tibet, Afghanistan and our other
to rain, hers it has never yet been beard, wil to retura
"Then," broke in the Prince of French Indo-China,
can keep every messenger out of the Closed Lands, we can
prevent His coming to reign on the earth and so frustrate the
purposes of the Most High.
"And that we will," cried the proud Prince of Cambodia.
"Only the other day," he continued, "a missionary himself
wrote sayiog, 'At this time we do not know of a single Cam-
bodian who has a saving knowledge of our Saviour Jesus
Christ.' We will see to it, Your Majesty, that not one escapes."
"That is good," said Satan. "Let us be even more vigilant
and frustrate every attempt to enter the Closed Lands."
As the great plan dawned upon them, they shouted with
glee, and hurried back to their empires, more determined
than ever to prevent the escape of a single soul.
Itty years passed. Restlessly His Satanic Majesty pace
ack and forth. Daik, foreboding frowns passed over n
countenance. It was quite apparent that something of an un-
usual nature was troubling him.
"It must not be," be muttered to himself. "And the very
plan, too," he continued in a louder tone.
"Yes, the very
plan. They seem to have caught a vision of it at last. 'Evan-
gelize, 'pioneer,' I don't like these words. And then that

I6
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
written statement of theirs, "The objects sought by the Society
include the following: To hasten the return of our Lord by
folipe in all he ward fof a this es tail at to read the
gospel in all the world for a witness to all nations,
take out of them a people for his name," as He said, "Go ye
into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature.
Its aim is to engage in only such activities as contribute to
world evangelism. Its missionary policy is to avoid dupli-
cating existing Gospel agencies abroad by directing its efforts
to pioneer service among peoples, tribes and nations where
Christ is not named.'
"'Regions beyond,' 'unoccupied areas,' 'pioneer service
among people, tribes and nations where Christ is not named!
And 'to hasten the return of our Lord by following His pro-
gramme for this age.' Then that phrase of theirs,
Borineing
back the King? 'The King!' 'The King!' It shall not be.
must frustrate their purposes! "The King!' What will happen
to me when He comes? I must call a council immediately.
In a few minutes they were all present. From the uttermost
parts they came--mighty fallen angels,
dignitaries, princes,
captains, world rulers of the darkness of this age in countless
multitudes they gathered around their lord, who stood with
pent-up rage in their midst. Silence, silence like the silence of
death, reigned. Presently Satan spoke:
"Prince of Alaska, stand thou forth!"
Trembling and afraid, with a shrinking form unlike his
appearance of fifty years before, he approached his dread
"Prince of Alaska," inquired Satan, "have they entered
"Yes, my lord, they have," slowly responded the Prince,
with a look of tear, hardly raising his eyes.
"How! What!" thundered Satan, scarcely able to control
himself. "Why didst thou not better guard my empire?"
"We did our best, Your Majesty, but it was all of no avail.
Word somehow got back; the frozen bodies of the first two
were discovered. It set the whole church on fire. Others ven-
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
I7
tured. Several we destroyed. More grew discouraged and
turned back. But finally, in spite all we could do, they
got through. Guarded and protected by legions of angels,
they entered and stayed; nor could we drive them out. And
today, there are hundreds of Eskimos in the Kingdom of God,
while thousands have heard the Tidings!"
The scene that followed beggars all description. Satan
fumed and fairly bellowed out his rage. The very air seemed
alive with a million spirits. His leading princes cowed before
him and sought to get away from bis terrible eyes.
"Prince of Tibet, stand thou forth!" roared the enraged
fiend, a moment later.
"Thou has a better report to give, I hope," he continued,
as that renowned leader stepped forward.
"No, my lord, I have fared but little better," answered the
"What!" stormed Satan. "Have any heard the Name in
thy domain, O Prince?"
"No power at my disposal could prevent it," responded the
Prince quietly. "We did. our best. All our forces toiled day
and night to overcome them. It seems there is a movement
raised up for the sole purpose of going where no one else has
gone and preaching in so-called unoccupied areas of the world,
whose leader, the Prince of China, wịth his forces tried to des-
troy, but in vain. Protected by legions of angels, he lived.
Dogs were turned on them. We filled the priests with deadly
hatred towards them. Pitfalls were laid for them on every side.
Starvation methods were adopted. Disease did its part. But
t was useless. On and on they pressed, until, today, there are
cores of Tibetans lost to us forever, and thousands of others
have heard the News. Far and wide, witness has been borne."
At that, Satan's rage knew no bounds. Without a moment's
delay, he turned and gave his final command:
"Prince of Afghanistan, stand thou forth!"
There was a moment's hesitation; then, with slow steps and
downcast eyes, the one addressed responded, and stood trem-
bling before his sovereign.
