The Passion for Souls
Chapter 11: GOD MANIFESTS HIS POWER IN REVIVATS

INE DAYS of the early church were days of revival.

Nothing but revival will ever solve the problems of the

world today. In fact, apart from revival it is doubtful
if there will be any church. AU over the world there are
those who are crying to Ged for another mighty manifesta-
fion of His power. Are those prayers going to be answered?
Wal revival come? And if it does, what will it-be like?
How much will it cost? Can we do anything to bring it
about? Can the prayer of Psalm Ixxxv. 6 be answered in our
éay and generation?—“Wilt thou not revive us agein: that
thy people may rejoice in thee?” Our eyes are upon God.
He alone can revive His people and when He does, there
will be joy the like of which the church has not known for
a generation.

Waan Do We Nezp Revivar?

May I ask and answer some very important questions. First
of all, when do we need revival, or to make it more personal,
when do you and I need revival?

When we have lost our first love, then it is that we neod
revival, Do you remember, my friend, when you were first
saved? Do you recall your love for souls, the realization of
the presence of God in your life? Do you remember how you
loved to pray and to testify and to sing the Gospel soags? Do
you recall how you were thrilled when you gave out tacts,
and especially when you led someone to Christ? How eagerly
in those days you worked for the Lord, how delighted you
were to do something for Jesus. How you loved to read the
Word. But what about today? Do you no longer feel the

108

THE PASSION FOR SOULS Tog

thrill? Has the joy of the Lord departed from your heart?
Are you neglecting His Word-and prayer? Has that first
love died and is everything now commonplace? If that is so,
then, my friend, you need revival.

When you have lst your burden for souls, then, too, you
need revival. Is it possible that you are on your way to heaven
while your loved ones are lost, and is it trie that you have no
burden, that your eyes are dry, that you can go on satisfied
and contented, knowing perfectly well that you are going to
heaven while they are going to hell? What abous that father
or that mother of yours, what about your sons and daughters,
what about your wife, your husband? Are you saved and are
they lost and yet is there no burden?

If I knew that I bad a son or daughter who was not saved,
I do not know how I could eat or sleep. It seems to me
that I would want to stay up half the night and agonize in
the presence of God in their behalf. I would take hold of
the horns of the altar and never let go until they were saved.
My eyes would be filled with tears and my heart with sorrow.
I could not rest until they had made the great decision. How
could I stand to have the circle broken? God’s Word is that
“Thou shalt be saved, and thy house.” I believe it. I claim
it, I want every member of my family converted. I could not

+ Dear it if it wore not so.

My eldest son was saved when he was nine years of age.
His mother and I led him to Christ. I will never forget the
way he wept before the Lord under deep conviction after one
of my messages and how he came to us when we got home,
his eyes red with tears, telling us that he wanted to be saved.
He was saved at his bedside. He is now specializing in
medicine in the General Hospital, Toronto, and he js still out
and out for His Lord.

My daughter was saved when she was ten years of age.
She, too, was led to Christ as her mother and I knelt beside
her at her bedside and she, too, was convicted of her need of
salvation. She now has two lite children of her own, and
she is still going on for the Lord.

110 THE PASSION FOR SOULS

My youngest son, who is now a Baptist evangelist, was saved
when he was barely more than five years of age. I was preach-
ing in Massey Hall, Toronto, that great auditorium, seating at
that time three thousand four hundred people and I gave the
invitation. I saw my own little five-year-old son coming
confidently down the aisle, with a very determined expression
on his face, and as he knelt at the altar, the Lord Jesus Christ
came into his heart.

I cannot, for the life of me, understand how any minister
can be satisfied to preach a Gospel sermon and then pronounce
the benediction and go home without ever giving the people to
whom he has preached, ani opportunity of accepting Christ as
Saviour there and then. How a minister can go on, Sunday
after Sunday, without seeing anyone walk down the aisle to be
saved, is truly beyond me. A lawyer is out for a verdict, so is
a minister, and if he is not, he should be, and if he does not
get a verdict, there is something wrong somewhere for God has.
promised fruit and it is his privilege to reap as well as sow.

‘All during the years of miy ministry I have given the invita-
tion, Sunday night efter Sunday night I have invited men
and women to come forward and enter the Inquiry Room to
accept Christ and very seldom have I been disappointed. If
no one should come, I would feel like going home to my study,
placing my head on the floor and crying to God, “What is
wrong with me? What has happened? Why were there no
souls tonight?” I would blame myself, Sometimes when the
going is hard I have seenmy personal workers all over the
church with bowed heads, almost groaning, until there was a
break. Then I have seen their faces light up with the joy of
the Lord as they prepared 'to go to the Inquiry Room to deal
with seekers. They anticipated resulis and they were not dis-
appointed. Practically every Sunday night there are some;
perhaps not many, but some at least. And on an odd Sunday
night, when for some zeason no one bas come publicly, in
neatly every case there have been results later. “According to
your faith, be it unto you.” Believe for results and you will get
Tesults. If you give the invitation in faith, God will work.

THE PASSION FOR SOULS ‘XII

From the moment I announce my message I expect that when
I give the invitation, some will respond.

My friend, if you do not have a burden for souls let me
say again, you need revival. Tf you are satisfied to go on year
after year without results, remember, there is something wrong.
‘You bad better get down on your knees and pray in confession
and penitence until God opens the floodgates of heaven and
sends a revival to your own heart, and then after setting you
on fire, enables you to kindle xevival fires in the hearts of
others, until at last your whole church will be aflame for God.

Waat Wit Happen?

Now I come to my second question, “What will happen
when revival comes?”

There are a lot of ministers, Christian workers, and churches
that do not want revival. They are afraid of what may happen.
They are afraid of fanaticism. They abhor interruptions. They
prefer a formal church service with each item carefully type-
written so that the service will go through from beginning to
end in a dignified way and close right on the dot. Revival, they
know, will break into their order of service. They have read
enough about revivals to know that when zevival breaks out,
God comes on the scene and when God is present there are
always interruptions.

‘The Acts of the Apostles is a book of interruptions. There were
uproars and commotions of one kind and another continually.
Nothing seemed to go as planned. Both Peter and Paul, and
for that matter, even Philip, experienced such upheavals, such
interruptions, such miracles, that they scarcely Imew what to
expect next. In revival there are bound to be interruptions.

Now reuival is first of all for the people of God. Tt is not
for the unsaved but never has there been a revival without the
unsaved being brought to Christ. Yet revival primarily has to
do with the church and with God’s own people. You cannot
revive a fire after it has gone out. There must at least be a

spark still remaining and if you blow on that spark you may

1x2 THE PASSION FOR SOULS

rekindle the fire, but if the last spark has gone out, then there
is no hope. You must start a new fre,

So it is with revival; there must be something to revive.
‘The dead cannot be revived, they have to be awakened. But
the Christian who is alive can be revived, heace revival com-
mences with the people of God.

But it is not very long, if God’s people have been set on
fire, before the children of satan will gather around the fire.
Nothing attracts like fire.; People will run from all directions
to see a house on fire. So it is with revival. When the church
is éruly aflame, the world will see it and be attracted by it.
‘Hence revival, while it has to do first of all with the Christian,
always resalis in the salvation of souls. The Psalmist cried,
“Wilt thou net revive us again,” emphasizing the word “as”
and referring, of course, to God’s people.

SaLvatioN

Souls, I say, will be sived. There will be conviction, real
old-fashioned, Holy Ghost conviction of sin. Sin will become
dreadful, awful, terrible. Oh, for the conviction of days gone
by! How lightly we look upon sin today. How horrible it is
in the sight of God! We need revival to bring back a. sense
of the awfulness of sin. Hence there will be conviction and
salvation. Souls will be saved.

I spoke a little while azo about the power of God, for that
ig what revival isthe manifestation of God’s power. “Ye
‘now not the power of God” is one of the most striking state-
ments in God’s Word. How true it is today. How little we
mow of God’s power. “The power of the Lord was present”
is another such statement, When have we been able to say at
the close of a service, “The power of the Lord was present”?
Our services oftentimes are so cold, so formal, so ordinary,
that there is no evidence of God's presence whatever. “They
were all amazed at the mighty power of God.” When, I ask
again, have we been amazed? What happens in our services
to catise amazement? When last did we witness a manifesta-

THE PASSION FOR SOULS II3,

tion of God’s power? Have we ever been amazed? Do we
know anything about it, or are these experiences of the early
church truly foreign fo us?

‘Do you know that when a revival is in progress the very
atmosphere in the community seems charged with the presence
of God? It was so in Kentucky as strangers approached the
place where the meetings were being held. As soon as they
got within a certain distance there was a strange mysterious
atmosphere that I can only explain by saying it was con
sciousness of the presence of God. They wete sobered before
they got to the building and as they approached nearer and
nearer, they were conscious of an increesing realization of
God's presence. They knew that God was there.

Jeoonent

When there is revival, there is judgment as well as salva-
tion, Read if you will, the histories of the revivals of the
past. You will discover that when men deliberately opposed
and rebelled against the work of the Spirit of God in their
community that God oftentimes struck them down in judg-
ment, sometimes with death, as in the cases of Auanias and
Sapphita. Charles G. Finney had that experience again and

- again. There are displays of God’s power in judgment, as

well as in salvation, during revival days. God knows how to
deal with opposers and He always makes examples of a few
at least. Wesley was almost a daily witness of such occur-
zences. People were smitten down before his very eyes and
more than one was judged on the spot. If is always dangerous
to tamper with God or with the work of God in days of revival.
Atheists are suddenly called to account as a warning to others.
God lives, and in times of revival, people know it.

Well do I remember a story related by Reverend Fred
Clark during the campaign held in my Tabernacle in Toronto,
known as the Clark and Bell campaign. Mr, Clark told about
a saloon keeper in a certain town in the Old Land who had
opposed the revival most vigorously because all his customers

Trg THE PASSION FOR SOULS

were leaving him. One night the saloon keeper made up his
mind to get his customers back and to denounce the evangelist.
‘That night be went to the meeting, Mr, Clark had been try-
ing desperetely to find a text but the only text God would give
him was the text, “Set thy house in order for thou shalt die
and not live.” Again and again he turned from it and sought
to find another but could not. Finally he decided to use it.
When the time came to preach he announced it but the
moment he did so the saloon keeper sprang to his feet and
let out such a volley of oaths that everyone wes petrified.
Suddenly he paused and the next moment there was @ gurgling
sound in his throat. Presenély he started to cough; blood flowed
from his mouth and the next moment he was on the fioor—a
corpse. So striking was God’s judgment that almost everyone
who was unsaved that night sought the Saviour, Thus God
uses judgment, as well as salvation, in days of revival.

Expansion

‘Now let me go on and say that when revival comes more
will be accomplished in a few weeks than in years through the
ordinary work of the church. In other words, Ged can do
more then and all I have to do is to give three or four illus-
trations to prove my point. When I was holding nation-wide
campaigns in Great Britain, after having preached in the
larger cities of England, Ireland and Scotland, I went to Wales
and of course I was tremendously interested, as T ministered
in Wales, for I remembered the revival of 1904. I was a
student at that time in Manitoba College, Winnipeg, but the
echoes of that mighty revival were carried across the Atlantic
and my young soul was'fired again and again as I heard and
read of what God was doing in Wales. I went to see Evan
Roberts, the man so mightily used of God during the Welsh
revival. He lives in a very humble home near Cardiff and he
spends most of his timeréading. It seems as though God picked
him up and used him, as He has seldom. used anyone, for afew
years and then set him aside for the rest of his life. His name

THE PASSION FOR SOULS a5

is known to millions. Today he is an old man, seldom seen or
heard. A litte while ago I received a letter from him in his
own handwriting, How I gloried in his ministry in 1904.

I discovered that twenty thousand had been converted and
joined the churches of Wales in five weeks. Can you tell me
where in the United States of America, the Dominion of
Canada or Great Britain, the ministers of all the cbarches
could win twenty thousand converts and get them to join their
churches within a period of five weeks? You know it has never
been done and through the ordinary channels of church work,
it never can be done, but it happened in Wales—a total of
twenty thousand actually joined the churches in five weeks.

Do you know how many church members there were in the
United States of America when Charles G. Finney commenced
his great revival work? There were then two hundred thousand.
Think of it! In the whole of America, only two hundred
thousand church members. But do you know how many there
were when he finished his work a few years later? There were
over three million. Yes, within the ministry of one man, three
million! What a miracle! Can you tell me where such results
could be duplicated? Is it not true that God does more in a
few weeks during days of revival than in years through the
ordinary channels of church work?

Why, when Finney held his campaign in the city of Rochester,
New York, it is estimated that one hundred thousand people
joined the churches. Think of it, as a result of that one cam-
Paign, which of course became a revival, one hundred thousand
accepted Christ and became members of the churches of Roches-
ter. How can you duplicate such results, apart from revival?

When the early Methodist preachers came to Canada and the
United States they did not come as pastors; they came as
mighty revivalists and wherever they went they kindled revival
fires, The results—ten million Methodists in the United States
today, mainly the result of the revivals of the early Methodist
Preachers. Methodism was born in revival and as long as they
had Methodist revivals, souls were saved in thousands. That

~is what God does when there is revival.
