The Passion for Souls
Chapter 10: EVANGELISM! GOD'S ANSWER TO THIS GROANING WORLD

(ELIS IS the twentieth century. Sinister forcesareat work.
False religions abound on every side. Nationalism is
sweeping the earth. Communism, the most powerful
weapon ever forged by satanic ingenuity, threatens to wipe
out Christianity. Atomic energy holds civilization at its mercy.

‘I wish I could live to write the year 2000 A.D., but that can
never be. Millions will, should Christ tarry ; I cannot. I believe
that the next fifty years will be the most momentous in the
history of mankind. Events of world-shaking significance are
already casting their shadows before them.

Colossal movements have been inaugurated; some for good,
others for il. The human race faces destruction. Cataclysmic
judgments are iievitable, Revolution, with all its horrors,
again lifts its hoary head. The Iron Curtain hides a slavery
worse than death. All creation groans. The birth pangs of a
new age are now being felt throughout the world. Once again
there is “the sound of a going in the tops of the mulberry
trees.” “The coming of the Lord draweth nigh.”

‘Tre Importance oF EvaNGELisM

I am not a professional evangelist but I have carried on
evangelistic work and I know that the oaly hope of our day
is a new manifestation of the power of God. T have been in
countries where I have seen that power in operation and T am.
confident that we can have here what I have witnessed there.
Evangelism is the order of the day, the need of the hovr.
Without revival, life as we know it, must perish. We must
evangelize or fossilize.

THE PASSION FOR SOULS cr

‘We all have our differences but there is one thing upon
which we can unite, and that is evangelism. If we cannot get
together on anything else, we shotld be able to work with
each cther in the winning of lost men and women to the Lord
‘Jesus Christ. Ministers and laymen of all denominations should
be able to co-operate when it comes to evangelism,

There exe ministers who feel that they can do their own
evangelical work and that there is no need to import a profes-
sional evangelist. Let me say, and I base my assertion on
forty years of ministry, for the most part as a pastor, that I
‘owe the success of my work, in a large measure, to evangelism.
The pastor of the church may be @ good preacher, greatly be-
loved by his people, but even the best voice can become tiring,
T have always welcomed others fo my pulpit because I have
zealized that a new voice is izoperative. An evangelist can win
those I can never hope to win. Then when I take over again,
my voice in turn becomes a new voice and thus the people
over grow weary. As soon es I feel that they have heard me
often enough, I bring in someone else to give them a change
and the evangelist always leaves us with new friends, most of
whom will stay with us after he has left.

‘The very fist campaign I held in Toronto lasted for six
monihs without the break of a night, Saturdays included, and
generally two or three services on the Sundays. I managed
the campaign and was the Chaiman at all the meetings. But
during the six months I had a dozen or more different evan-
gelists, one after the other, to do the preaching. Thus I always
had someone new to advertise and the people could continually
look forward to a new voice. The crowds increased from week
to week. Interest was intense and before it was over, many
imméreds of souls had been saved, so that the work was
greatly strengthened as a result. Every campaign more than
paid for itself: for I saw io it that there was always something
worthwhile in the treasury et the close.

‘Ul down the years, ever since, I have had two or three,
and sometites half a dozen campaigns each year, and in
addition many special conferences of one kind and another.

98 THE PASSION FOR SOULS

lll of this hes stimulated the spiritual life of the people, added
new interest, created enthusjasin and consolidated the work.
In between campaigas I have done the preaching and as tbe
work became stronger and the crowds increased, I did more
of the pulpit work myself, but I have never feit that i could
doit alone. Even to this day I bring outside speakers to hold
evangelistic campaigns. |

‘Tae DrirFicutties oF EVANGELISM

‘There was a day in the work of evangelism and revival,
not so very long ago, when,all the churches of a given town.
closed their doors and co-operated. It is no wonder that men
like Bily Suaday got big crowds. For years Billy Sunday
would not go toe town unless every church in the town agreed
to close its doors and unite in the campaign. Consequently
the choirs of all the churches were on the platform and more
important still, the ministers, and since the churches were
closed and the people had nowhere else to go, of course they
came to the Tabernacle where the campaign wes being held
and filled it to capacity and then as they looked up and saw
their own ministers sitting on the platform, they were inspired
to co-operate, to give and to pray and to do whatever they
could to make the campaign a success, That is the ideal way
to win souls to Christ.

We are living in a day, however, when it seems next to
impossible to get all the ministers of any one town and all the
churches to co-operate. We are fortunate today if we can
succeed in getting even the evangelical churches to close their
doors and work with us, forleven among fundamentalists there
is so much division and strife that it is difficult to secure the
necesary co-operation. But it is still true that any town or
city could be moved for God and a mighty revival could take
place of the churches themselves would unite in a soul-winning
effort and work dogether,\ministers of all denominations,
for the evangelization of the Christless masses on every
side. ‘

THE PASSION FOR SOULS 99

Sometimes it is objected that we need moze Bible teaching,
more Bible conferences, that we should give more attention to
the study of the Word. Evangelism, it is stated, does not con-
solidate or teach. I beg to disagree. As I have studied the
history of revival and evangelism all down the centuries, I
have discovered that there is more teaching, more personal
soul winning and that a greater number of people are inspired

- to study the Word of God during days of revival and evan-

gelism than at any other time,

‘When the Holy Spirit is at work, the people naturally turn
to the Bible and study it. Bible Classes are formed. Instruc-
tion is given in personal work, New converts testify and pray
in public and as a result there is a greater knowledge of the
Bible imparted than at any other time. Bible teaching with-
out evangelism will result in stagnation, but evangelism, which
always produces Bible study, will inspire and bless.

Then let me point out thet it is the follow-up work that

counts most, not the work that is done by the evangelist him-

self. The evangelist is like the doctor—he brings the baby
into the world, but no one would ever expect the doctor to
remain and take care of the child. That is the follow-up work:
which taust be done by the parents. The doctor's responsibility
ceases when the baby is bora. It would be wrong to blame
the doctor if the child did not develop properly after a healthy
and normal birth, and it is just as wrong to blame the evan-
gelist if the converts do not go on in the Faith and make pro-
gress after he kas brought them into the light. That, I say,
is the responsibility of others, namely, the pastor, the Sunday
School teacher, the leaders of the Young People’s work and
all those who remain to take care of the new converts. If
special convert classes are organized, the converts can soon be
established and taught tbe fundamental docizines of the Faith
so that they will stand tue and steadfast and become active
workers for the Lord Jesus Christ.

‘There is a lot of evangelism today that belittles the pastor.
Lam sorry to have to admit this, but it is true, The kind of
evangelism we need js that evangelism that will hold-up the

‘00 THE PASSION FOR SOULS

hands of the pastor and in every possible way support and en-
courage him. For an evangelist to ctiticize or find fault in ay
way with a pastor before the people is a tragic mistake. He
‘has enough to contend with in any case, He needs to be €2-
couraged and the evangelist should do everything possible to
make it easy for him, He should be honoured before his peop!e-
It is for this reason that I believe every evangelist, for a fw
years at least, should become a pastor go as to be able to syM~
pathize with the pastor in his problems and know how to help
him. He may not be perfect, but that may also be true of the
evangelist and I am afraid that one of the teasons so many
churches have tumed against evangelism is because the eva
gelist has been discourteous to the pastor and has not given
him the help he could.

Having been both a pastor and an evangelist, I know pe
fectly well that the work of the pastor is by far the most
difficult and that the evangelist, in comparison, has an ea5Y
time. He only has to face the problems for two or three weeks
in any one place, then hé can leave. But the pastor is ver
burdened with them. It is for this reason I slip away every
now and again and hold! a campaign, for it enables me to
forget the petty problems of the pastor. Evangelists would
do well tc adopt a new attitude towards the pastors with whom
they work. :

Tas Neep op EvANcriisM

Do you know that the world evangelists are all deed?
There is not one alive today. D. 1.. Moody has gone; R. A-
Torrey is no more; J. Wilbur Chapman hes passed; Billy
Sunday has finished “his work and now my very dear ead
personal friend, the world-famous Gypsy Smith, has also gone
on and, sad to say, there are very few on the horizon capable
of filling the shoes of those whose names are household words
throughout the world. That is because our seminaries and
Bible colleges are not training evangelists. They are training
pastors and missionaries but not evangelists. How many of
them take up a study of the history of evangelism and revival?

THE PASSION FOR SOULS TOL

How many of them study the lives and methods of the great
evangelists and revivalists of the past? How many of them
teach their students how to conduct evangelistic campaigns?

‘There was a day when the great denominations of Canada,
for instance, employed evangelists. Well do I remember when
Crossley and Hunter, who worked together for 2 quarter of a
century, toured the Dominion as the official evangelists of the
Methodist Church of Canada. I remember because 1 was in
their meetings. Today they are gone and so far as I know,
none of the great denominations of Canada employ evangelists
and yet our churches have been built on evangelism. Now
other methods are being used and a3 a result, our pews are
empty. Congregations have united and very few young people
are being converted and brought into the church. What Canada
needs today more than anything else, and what every denomin-
ation in Canada needs, is an amy of evangelists or revivalists
to go up and down the country, from church to church, and
city to city, calling the people back to God.

‘There is a vast difference between evangelism and revival.
‘An evangelistic campaign may become a revival but an
evangelistic campaign in itself is not a sevival. I know it
is customary in the Southern States for evangelists to speak
of holding ‘a revival. What they really mean is that they
are going to hold an evangelistic campaign, and in most
cases the campaign opens and closes without becoming a
revival.

I thank God for every evangelistic campaign, especially
when ail commercial aspects are absent. I know something of
the harm that has been done because of the emphasis on
finances, especially in connection with love offerings. I would
like to see the day come when the evangelist, like the pastor,
could be put on a definite salary from headquarters so that
everyone would know exactly how much he receives and the
accusation of profiteering and religious racketeering would
never be heard. It is always hard to understand why an
evangelist needs more than a pastor and in most cases, 50
much more, Surely if our leading pastors can get along on

i
102 THE PASSION FOR SOULS

salaries of from five to. ten thousand dollars a year, an
evangelist should not require more. The world has had a
tight, I am afraid, for a great deal of its criticism. And yet
the denominations themselves are to blame, for if they had
continued to employ evangelists at stated salaries, free-lance
evangelists would not be necessary. There should be a place
in every denomination for the evangelist. He should receive
a stated allowance from headquarters and all offerings over
and above expenses, should be tamed in. That is, perhaps,
the one and only solution to the problem.

Tam awaze of the fact that the money is oftentimes wisely
used and in many cases for the work of God, but even that does
not offset the criticism. The fact remains that the evangelist
gets it, no matter what he does with it, and since America is
the richest country on thé face of the earth, it is possible for
him to exploit the people if he wants to. But for his own sake,
as well as for the sake of the testimony bome, it would be
infinitely better, as I have stated, if he could receive a definite
allowance and be put on the same basis as a pastor. That
would avoid all criticism’ regarding finances.

I make no financial dethands for myself, I prefer to leave it
with those I serve, to do whatever God lays on their hearts.
I have never set a price on my ministry. Some times I have
received litile or nothing,; not even expenses. In other places
T have been given more than I deserved. For months I cem-
paigned in New Zealand, Australia, Jamaica, and Great
Britain, and while gifts totalling ten thousand dollars were
handed to me for missionis, never once was an offering taken
for me personally. But I have been more than satisfied for
God hes deigned to use me for His glory and He has never
failed me once. I do not'like love-offerings; they always em-

“barrass me. I would rather the Committee would agree on a

nominal honorarium and’ include it in the budget. I do not
think we will ever get away from “commercialized evangelism”
until we abolish the love-offering.

We owe almost everything we have to evangelism. Most
of those who have bean converted have been converted in

THE PASSION FOR SOULS ‘03

evangelistic campaigns or during periods of revival. I would
say that sixty-two per cent at least have been reached for
Christ through special meetings. Again and again I have asked
for a show of bands and it has always been the same. What will
happen, I wonder, when the Christians of today have passed
on if there have been no campaigns in which to win others to
Christ. In England the young people, for the most part, are
gone. They have been lost to the church and the cry of the
older Christians is, “Who will take our places when we are
gone?” Evangelism is the only solution. Revival is impera-
tive.
‘Tue Resuits or EvaNceuisw

As I have stated, I have majored on Missions and Evan-
gelism down through the years. In the carly days we had an
average of approximately five hundred conversions each year.
‘These newborn babes socn filled our pews with the resulé that
the older Christians found their seats taken unless they came
early. For years upon years we did no newspaper advertising
whatever, so great were the crowds. I have had a letter from
the Fire Chief demanding that I reduce my audiences because
of the fire hazard. I read the letter to the people on a Sunday
night when the church was packed with more than two
thousand, many standing around the walls, others sitting on
the steps in the aisles after numbers had been tumed away,
and the only result was that a still larger number tried to get
in the following Sunday night.

We used to have a great pipe organ that occupied the
entire space back of the gallery and when our people saw so
many hundreds being turned away, week after week, in those
early days, they began praying, asking God to send someone
to buy the organ in order that a second gallery might be built
in its place to accommodate more. After a few months God
heard-and answered and the organ is now in another large
Church in Toronto. In its place we built a second gallery,
above and back of the main gallery and the first night it was
opened it was packed to capacity with scores sitting on the

104 THE PASSION FOR SOULS

steps in the aisles and from that day to this, aside from the

hot suomer months, and the vacation season, it has been
filled to capacity and many scores, if not hundreds of
souls, have come dowa from the elevation, as we call it, io
get saved.

T have had the police walk in on me just-before the service
was to commence, insisting that I reduce the size of my
audience, refusing to allow so many to siand around the
sides or sit in the alsles. The only thing 1 could do, as I have
stated, was to stop all newspaper advertising and even then,
for a number of years, with scarcely an exception, I preached
to more than two thousand people each Sunday night.

Evangelism will fil any church. I have proved it again
and again and it will fill week after week and year after year.

. Never will I forget the campaign that I was privileged to hold
jn the famous Park Street Church, Bostoa. Not only was it
filled to capacity, but many were compelled to stand and at
the end of the two weeks more than two hundred had made the
great decision, The church was revolutionized. It has never
een the same since. God marvelously worked and what
evangelism did for Park Street Chureh, it can do for any
church. Dr. Harold John Ockenga, the noted Pastor himselt,
will beax out what I have said.

‘The greatest evangelistic campaigns of my life were held
in Australia and New Zealand. Many times it was impossible
to find places large enough to take care of the crowds. I
ministered all by myself but from the very beginning God
worked. The record has been published again and again.
Extracts appear in my book What Hath God Wrought? The
people of Australie and New Zealand will never forget the
campaigns of 1938. 1 had been stricken with malaria fever
and yet, in spite of great weakness, God wrought. It was a
miracle from beginning to end. At least one thousand found
Christ and long before the campaigns closed the converis
themselves had become my persoual workers. Tt was a never-
to-be-forgotien experience. I have been invited back again
and again ever since but have not yet been able to go.

THE PASSION FOR SOULS ‘IOS

Perhaps one of my most outstanding campaigns, a cam-
paign that almost became a revival, was held during January,
1948, in the little island of Jamaica. Mrs. Smith and I, along
with my preacher son, Paul, aud his wife, conducted the cam-
paiga. In the afternoons the meetings were held in the Ward
Theatre, the largest building in Jamaica, with its two great
galleries, and hundreds were compelled to stand. At night we
‘used the huge racecourse. Mr. Emest Clark, who organized
the campaign, planned for an attendance of approximately
five thousand. The first couple of nights there were four
thoasand present; the rest of the first week we had six thousand
each night. During the second week, every night saw an
audience of ten thousand and the lest night there were at
Jeast fifteen thousand present although many estimated the
crowd at twenty thousand.

From one hundred io more than two hutdred responded
to the invitation each night. On the last night I counted at least
four hundred and eighty who had decided for Christ. A con-
servative estimate would be a total of two thousand decisions
@uring the two weeks. There was a bunger, the like of which
{have seldom seen. The people were there an hour before
the service started. After the converts came forward we had
to wait nearly half an bour while we cleared the great grand-
stand in order to deal with them. Jamaica had. never seen
sach crowds before for any purpose, political or religious and
no one who was present will ever forget the inspiration and
blessing.

Tur Joy or EVANGELISM

After I had spoken to a large group of ministers in Sidney,
Australia on evangelism I noticed a minister with a very sad
expression on his face coming slowly towards me and I waited,
wondering what was wrong. He stood for a moment before
speaking and then, as | remember it, he spoke to me somewhat
as follows: “Dr. Smith, do you really mean what you say?”
“Why?” I replied, “What do you mean?” “Do you really
mean,” he emphasized, “that you believe it is possible to do

“106 THE PASSION FOR SOULS

as you have suggested?” “Well, what do you mean?” T asked
again. “Do you think,” he coatinued, “that it is posible for a
Presbyterian minister to give an invitation?” and he empha-
sized the word “Presbyterian.” “Well,” I replied, “Iam a
Presbyterian minister and all during the days of my ministry
Jhave extended an invitation end J have seen men and woinen
in hundreds walk down the aisles to accept Jesus Christ as
Saviour.” “But you know,” he answered, “it just isn’t done.
‘That isn’t the way we do it in the Presbyterian Church.” “I
know it,” I said, “but nevertheless I see no reason why even
a Presbytetian minister should not give an invitation.”

‘With a sormowful expression he twmed away and in a few
moments I forgot all about him. The following Monday night,
however, I was holding my meetings as usual in the General
Assembly Hall of the Presbyterian Church and I was just about
to ascend the pulpit steps when I noticed 2 commotion, at the
door. I paused, wondering what had happened. Presently, to
my amazement, I saw the face of my friend, the Presbyterian
minister of the past Saturday, struggling with a number of
people at the door, and I realized that he was trying to force
‘his way through the crowd, so I waited. At last he managed
to get by and start rapidly down the aisle and I saw that he
was making straight for me. Then, to my astonishment, I saw
shat he had a young woman on his left arm and another on bis
right and that he was tugging these two young women after
hin.

Finally he came within talking distance of me and I noticed
that his face was illuminated and then I heard him call ont,
“Jt works, it works,” and for the life of me I was unable to
grasp his meaning. “What works?” I asked as he reached
me. “Why,” he exclaimed, “what you said Saturday. Sunday,
for the first time in my life, I gave the invitation and look
what I got” and with that he thrust the two young women in
front of me. I questioned thom and I discovered that they
luad both been soundly converted and then I remembered the
incident of Saturday and it began to dawn on me that some-
thing had really happened.

THE PASSION FOR SOULS roy

He had given the invitation the day before but in fear and
trembling. Two hands wont up. He scarcely knew what to
do but he asked those who had raised them to stand. The
two young women stood to their feet. Uncertain what to do
next, but remembering that I had invited those wishing to be
saved to the Inquiry Room, he did the same. They came with-
out a moment's hesitation, Not having any personal workers,
however, he had to go into his vestry and deal with them him-
self, but he did so and they were saved. What a change. That
Presbyterian minister went back to his work to do the thing he
had neglected to do all his ministry. He went back to give the
peopie to whom he preached an opportunity to accept Jesus
Christ instead of pronouncing the benediction and going home.
His whole ministry was revolutionized. He began io ex-
perience something of the joy of evangelism and he learned
from experience that even a Presbyterian minister cau give an
invitation.

My suggestion to you, my friend, would be, “Go, and do
thou likewise.”
