The Passion for Souls
Chapter 12: ‘THE ABIDING RESULTS OF EVANGELISM AND REVIVAL

VERYWHERE we go we hear the question, “Do the
vesulés last?” As a Jmatter of fact, that is one of the
major objections to fevival and evangelism, There is a

false impression abroad to, the effect that the results are never
perinanent, Many a minister feels that his own work is bound
to have more effect than any effort put forth by an imported
evangelist. He focls that the results do not last and that, there-
fore, they are not worthwhile. That question should be answered.

May I say, that all the visible results did not last in the days
of Josus and if some of His results were not permanent, why
should we expect ours to b¢ permanent? Do you not remember
the statement, “From that time many of his disciples went
back, and walked no mote with him’? John vi, 66. There
were many professed followers in His day whose hearts bad
never been changed. They seemed to be genuine. They were
the results of His ministry but they did not last. As soon as
they realized something of the difficulties that confronted them
and the hardships of the way, they went back. Tn other words,
they backslid, They left Him “and wallsed no more with him.
There is nothing unusual about that. Tn fact it is to be ex-
pected. There is always the mixed multitude, the “hangers-
on,” the professors, who ere not possessors. Is it extracrdinary
if many of the visible results of today are found to be unreal?
‘What else can we expect? Are we better than our Lord and our
work than His work?

Tue TRUE anp THE Farse

The enemy is always sowing tares among the wheat. There
are the children of Satan as well as the children of God and
they are found in the visible church. Tt is almost impossible
to distinguish them. They look so much alike. They act alike,

x6

THE PASSION FOR SOULS 17

they talk alike and many are deceived. It is Satan’s business
to sow tares and in every revival, or whenever an evangelistic
campaign is held, the enemy is busy sowing his tares.

As a matter of fact, only one quarter of the seeds sown bear
‘fruit. Our Lord Himself told us that. Can we not be satisfied
if a fourth of those who profess conversion are really con-
verted? Would noé that be a rather high average for our day?
If I remember rightly, Moody figured that if ten per cent
stood it would be a good average. Why despair because
three-fourths of those who make a profession are found to be
counterfeit?

Ave there not always more blossoms than fruit? Oftentimes
the trees are covered with blossoms and there is but little fruit,
Why then become discouraged? Would it not be better to
thank God for what fruit there is? We must expect an abun-
dance of blossoms and if we get some fruit, we can be grate-
ful. Professions always exceed possessions.

When I was holding evangelistic campaigns in Scotland, I
came into contact with a great many of the outstanding evan-
gelical leaders of that country and in almost every case, I
jeamed that they were either the converts, or the converts of
the converts, of the great Moody-Sankey campaigns of two
generations ago. The greatest gift that America ever gave to
Scotland was the gift of D. L. Moody. Mocdy accomplished
more in Scotland than he did in his own country, No one there
will ever forget him. The upheaval catsed by the meetings of
Moody and Sankey affected the entire country and Scotland
can never be the same again. Most certainly, therefore, the
results lasted jn Scotland. I tremble to think what Scotland
might have been if it hed not been for Moody and Sankey.
‘Their names are household words,

Then, t00, there is Methodism under John Wesley. Wesley
and Whitfield toured the British Isles hoiding evangelistic cam-
paigns and revival services. The greatest soul-winning agency
the world has ever known since the days of the Apostles, has
‘been the Methodist Church, Would anyone dare to say that
the results have not lasted? Methodism, itself, with its millions

118 THE PASSION FOR SOULS

of members, is the answet. Wesley’s revivals were not in vain.
Of course the results lasted.

What about the results of the work of the Apostle Paul?
Did his result last, or have they passed away? Christianity,
itself, is the answer. Europe might never have been evan-
gelized had it not been for Paul. Even North America, might
still have beea in darkness had Paul tumed eastwerd instead

-of westward. Panl’s preaching produced revivals everywhere.

Evangelism was the order of the day and now for nearly two
thousand years the work has gone on in ever-widening cicles,
proving conclusively that the results do last. In fact there és
no other work that abides like the work of evangelism and
revival.

Tue Prosrem or Topsy

Te is true that it is harder to get results today than ever
before. In fact, some of our lergest evangelical churches are
afraid to hold evangelistic campaigns any more: They tell us
that they can still get crowds on Sundays, but not through
the week, and that it is becoming increasingly difficult to
meet the expenses of a campaign. Why? I wonder.

There is perhaps an explanation which should not be over
looked. As soon as men are won to Christ through the agency
of the church, they are almost immediately persuaded to join
some outside organization, some evangelical movement that
occupies most of their time and takes them away from the
cburch in which they were saved.

When I first sponsored evangelistic campaigns in Toronto,
T could look down almost any night and see every man in his
place. There were the ushers, the personal workers, the
prayer warriors, and thé members of the volunteer choir. The
same workers night after night, right on the job. What is the
situation today? I see them once or twice during am entire
campaign. They no longer feel their responsibility. Where
are they? At some banquet or supper, or out giving their
testimony, or perhaps attending committee or business mect-
ing of the organization tb which they belong.

THE PASSION FOR SOULS rg

They are doing a splendid work, but the fact remains, that
they are using their talents and gifts elsewhere, and that the
charch, God’s one and only Scriptural agency, is the loser,
and that it is no longer possible to sustain soul-winning cam-
paigas with so many workers absent. If they were to put the
same amount of effort and money into the great soul-winning
work of the church, evangelists could still be engaged and
compels suied on.

am not clear as to the solution. I would not want to take
them eway from the movements to which they feel called;
but I cannot help pointing out that to some extent, at least,
we are robbing Peter to pay Paul, 1 feel that when 2 cam-
paign is held every Christian worker should set aside all
other meetings and engagements of whatever nature, and be
in his place every night in order that the hands of the pastor
and te evangelist might be strengthened and the work

a ‘or when are ceases, i i
foe, to evangelize, it will

Thon there is one other hindrance and it is most serious.
It is the car and the summer cottage. Today Christians think
nothing of forsaking the House of God on the Lord’s Day.
They get in their cars as soon as the weather permits and
motor to their cottages, leaving Saturday and returning Mon-
day, Thus the chnrch loses their support and campaigns can-
not be sustained. In reality they are casting a vote to close
the church for the summer months, for 2s soon as everyone
does it, the church will have to close its doors.

‘My brethren, these things ought not to be. God says, “If
thou tum away thy foot from the sabbath, from doing thy
pleasure on my holy day; and call the sabbath a delight, the
holy of the Lord, honourable; and shalt honour him, not doing
thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking
thine own words: then shalt thou delight thyself in the Lord”
(Isaiah iviii, 13, 14). It is either our pleasure or God’s pleas-
ure: which is it to be? Evan Roberts was afraid to miss a
single meeting for fear the Holy Spirit might come and the
revival break out when he was absent. Are we concerned?
