The Passion for Souls
Chapter 7: • WHY HAS THE CHURCH FAILED IO EVANGELIZE

THE WORLD?
YURN, IF you will, to the Word of God as it is found
in John's Gospel, chapter four, verse thirty-five.
not ye, There are yet four months, and then
harvest? Behold, I say unto you, Lift up your eyes, and look
on the fields; for they are white already to harvest." My
friends, my heart burns within me whenever I read these
words. How true they are even today!
Nearly 2,000 years have now gone by since Jesus Christ told
us to evangelize the world and vet there are still more than a
thousand tribes without the Gospel, while multiplied millions
in countries like China and India-yellow, black and brown
_have never once heard of Christ. At least sixty-five per cent
of earth's two billion, three hundred million inhabitants are
still unevangelized.
God's commands are always accompanied by His enable-
ments. We could have done it. He would not have mocked us
by asking us to do the impossible. "The Gospel MUST be pub-
lished among ALL nations." Why then has it not been done?
FIRST-BECAUSE OF THE ENEMIES OF THE GOSPEL
We are confronted today with enemies we have never faced
before, and sometimes we wonder if we can overcome them.
There ara three especially with which we must contend. I reter
to Nationalism, False Religions, and Communism.
Nationalism is manifesting itself in almost every country
and it is making missionaty work increasingly difficult. Its
68
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
6g
slogan is "Africa for the African, India for the Indian, China
for the Chinaman, etc.," and it is determined to drive the
white man out. Foreigners are looked upon with suspicion
and even the missionary is no longer welcome.
False Religions have always been the enemies of the Gospel,
especially Mohammedanism and Roman Catholicism. Neither
believes in freedom of any kind. Where Roman Catholicism
is weak, it cries out for tolerance and freedom; as soon as it
becomes strong, it becomes totalitarian and freedom is un-
known. Christians are persecuted, tortured and martyred
i stones is beco
wherever it holds sway. It knows no mercy and shows none.
Protestantism is the only religion that believes in and prac-
tises freedom.
Communism is the most diabolical weapon ever devised by
Satanic ingenuity. It bas spread faster than any other ism and
it is attacking Christianity in every country. It boasts of a
million followers in South America alone. This demon-inspired,
atheistic movement will never compromise. Its Jron Curtain
cut oft all intercourse with the outside world and conceals the
Red Terror within. It murdered John and Betty Stam and,
sooner or later, it will silence anyone who attempts to preach
These then, are the enemies of the Gospel. But in spite of
all opposition we must press forward, taking our orders from
"Behold, I give unto you authority over all the
power of the enemy" (Luke 8. Ig). There is power in the
Gospel to overcome every foe and to evangelize the world.
"The Gospel
... is the power of God unto salvation to
everyone that believeth" (Rom. i. I6).
SECOND—BECAUSE OF OUR EMPHASIS ON EDUCATION
Now I believe in education. Schools are necessary. There
are those who must make up for their deficiencies somehow.
But there are men with natural talents, men like Moody,
Philpott, and Gipsy Smith, who will succeed either with or
without an education. Today we worship diplomas, we glory

THE PASSION FOR SOULS
in degrees. Yet there are sore men who cannot make good
even with a degree.
Fransor sent Hudson Taylor one hundred new mission-
aries. They had little or no education, and when Taylor saw
them he wrote Fransom reprimanding him for sending them.
Two years later he wrote again. He had seen their work. They
had made good, for they were Spirit-filled men, and God
had given them the language and blessed their efforts, and
he wanted more like them.
There was a time when I said to the volunteer, "Get all
the education you can." I do not say that any more. There
are other pre-reqiusites more important. For some, education
may be dangerous. Altogether too many seeking a B.A. OI
an M.A. have had their faith shipwrecked. There are inose
who need it; but there are others who would be better without
it. There can be no genetal rule for all. Each one must be
dealt with individually.
I fear for the Bible Schools that are today beginning to give
degrees, or that want to become Seminaries.
I am afraid for
their future. It is not what a man has in his head, but what
he has in his heart, that counts. Simpsou and Moody founded
their schools to give those denied an education, a chance to
work for God. It is the study of the Bible itself that is most
important. All other subjects are of secondary importance.
God forbid that we should lose the vision.
God can use the best education that can be secured, that is,
if the Holy Spirit is in control. But He can also use men with
little or no education. Why then should we put a premium
on education? Most Societies, I think, have discovered that
if a candidate has a high school education and a three-year
Bible Course, with a year of practical work, he is fitted for
his task, so far as schools are concerned, unless, of course, be
wants to specialize. Yes, and even some without High School
standing have been mightily used of God.
Nothing is more fatal to evangelistic fervour than a long
course of study. Many an enthusiastic soal-winner has dried
up and lost his vision in a college or seminary atmosphere. A
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
Christian worker should never become a hermit. Seven or
eight months of study and then four or five of practical
experience will keep him on fire for God. Each summer he
should put into practice what he has learned. He must never
be a student only. He must always be in active service. All
through his course he should be witnessing, testifying, doing
personal work or preaching-somehow busy for his Lord.
Otherwise, he will lose his first love. Revival fires will die out
and his passion for souls will be gone.
Many students think they are through when they graduate,
when they receive their diploma or their degree. Let me say
that they are just ready to begin. The school has taught them
how to study; now they must educate themselves. They can
learn infinitely more after they have graduated, if they will
settle down to study, than they ever dia before. They can
now specialize; select their own reading and become authori-
ties in their field.
That is how some who have never gone to school have
become outstanding leaders. Think, if you will, of Gipsy
Smith. He never had an education. By himself he had to
learn to read and write. But have you heard him speak?
Have you noted his faultless English? I have had him in my
home again and again and I never once heard him make a
mistake in grammar, and that is more than I can say for
many a B.A. and D.D. Missionaries
are God-made.
"infit" is more important than the "outfit"
will determine his usefulness.
• What he is hiraself
Some oi the finest men in the ministry would have been
lost to the church had the Seminaries from which they gradu-
ated required a college standing for admission. If a man is
called of God to preach the Gospel and he does not qualify
from a scholastic standpoint, who are we to stand in his way?
Must all go through the same mould? What about the prophets
of old? Can no one be a successful minister, or evangelist,
unless he has mastered Greek and Hebrew?
It was for this very reason that Bible Schools were born.
They took the young man from the plough and the girl from

72
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
the kitchen and trained them for Christian service. The denom-
inations have lost thousands of their finest and most devoted
workers just because they kept the bars up
and set their
academic requirements so high.
A thorough knowledge of
the Bible and how to use it is the best qualification for Christian
I am thinking now of a man in the United States who has
accomplished a stupendous work for God. He applied to the
seminary of his denomination in Canada and was rejected
because he did not have three years of Arts. He could not go
to college because he had never been able to go through high
school and he was too old to go back. He applied to one of
the promineut seminaries of a large denomination in the United
States wad was immediately accepted. He graduated and was
ordained, but the church in Canada had lost him. He should
have been treated as a special student and taken in, for he was
God-called and he was bound to make good.
Most schools fail to teach their students how to do the job.
They give them a head knowledge but do not tell them how
to put it into practice. Very few have a course on the History
of Evangelism and Revival, and nothing is more important.
I know of only two schools where the students are really taugt
to speak in public, where they are instructed in the technique
of holding evangelistic campaigns, methods of advertising, the
organization and conduct of special revival services, etc.
Hence, all they know is the work of the pastor. How much
more could be accomplished both at home and on the foreign
field if they knew how to put on big meetings and attract the
multitudes for God.
Evangelistic campaigns are needed in the foreign field just
as much as in the homeland. In fact, they are even more
fruitful. Our missionaries could learn something from Youth
for Christ in this connection. We need to come out into the
open. We must make ourselves felt in large cities throughout
the world. When I was holding a campaign in the Dutch
East Indies, the missionaries did not want me to give a public
invitation. In fact, my interpreter refused. But I went abead
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
73
and God worked wonders. From then on the missionaries were
all for it. Mass evangelista is God's most effective method even
in foreign lands.
THIRD-BECAUSE OF THE MANY CLOSED DOORS
But what about the open doors? Why not enter them? Do
we not spend too much time praying for the ciosed doors to
open, when there are so many doors still open, waiting to be
entered? Paul, you remember, turned from the closed doors,
one after the other, and entered those that were open. There
are open doors everywhere. Let us enter them and leave God
to open the closed ones in His own good time. He knows where
and when He wants. us to work, and He will make it plain.
FOURTH-BECAUSE WE HAVE THOUGHT THAT THEIR OWN
RELIGIONS WERE GOOD ENOUGH FOR THEM
People who should know better tell us that the heathen are
better off as they are; that their own religions satisty them and
meet their need. Is that true? If so, then most certainly we
should leave them alone. But are they happy as they are?
I am thinking now of that Mohammedan in Algeria who
slashed his head again and again with a large knife, until
the blood flowed freely, then took newspapers and plastered
them on top of his head; finally taking out a match, striking
it, and setting fre to the papers, hair and blood. Can you
imagine the agony? Why the self-inflicted torture? Because
of his religion. He was laying up merit in heaven. Mohara-
medanism taught him to afflict himself and he was doing it
with a vengeance.
Would you exchange places with him?
Would you accept his Mohammedanism and give him your
Christianity? Which religion would you prefer? Do you
think Mohammedanism brought him peace and comfort and
happiness, or the very opposite? I leave you to answer.
I am thinking now of my visit to the Aborigines of Australia,
and of what happens when a baby is born. The witch doctor

74
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
must find a victim somewhere, for someone is ill or has died.
So he seizes on the newborn infant and in spite of the mother's
protests and agonizing appeals, he fills its little mouth with
sand until it chokes to death. Why does he do it? Because
his pagan religion tells him he must. The spirits have to
be satisfied. Does such a religion make that mother happy?
Does she enjoy seeing her little baby murdered before her
eyes? I think. not.
Yet you tell me that her religion is good
enough for her. Would you exchange places? Would you be
willing to be that mother? Again, I leave you to answer.
I am thinking of the days I was in Africa, where twin
babies are always killed. If God should give you twins, would
you be willing to have them murdered! You would have to
f vou lived in Africa, for your religion would compel vou to
destroy them.
I am thinking of my, travels through India and of the
Hindu widows who, because of their religion, used to have
to lie down beside their husbands when they had died and
allow themselves to be bound and burned alive. Thousands of
them have gone into eternity screaming in agony, as they
slowly burned to death. Would you exchange your religion
for theirs? Do you think it brings them any pleasure, any
enjoyment? Yet you tell me to leave them alone, that they
are better off as they are. What a callous philosophy!
I am thinking, too, of the pagans in Africa, who, when a
chief dies, throw his widows thirty, sixty of a hundred of
them-into the grave with him and bury them alive. Is that
a pleasant prospect? Would you be satisfied with such a
Last of all, I am thinking of my experiences in the South
Sea Islands,
where, when a husband dies, his
strangled to death, and that by her eldest son if he is old
enough, along with all the younger children if they are too
young to shift for themselves.
Think, if you will, of the
thousands of widows who have thus died.
Would a religion
that densads such i go practice the you? Then ow
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
75
Until you, my friend, are willing to accept these religions
with their consequences, their abominable practices,
self, you ought to be ashamed to say that the beathen are
better off as they are. Their religions are religions of tear.
They know nothing of peace and love. They have no hope.
Christianity alone offers them life, abundant life, and that
which satisties the heart.
FIFTH-BECAUSE WE HAVE NOT SENT OUT A SURFICIENT
NUMBER OF MYSSIONARIES
The problem is still one of labourers. In China there are
vast harvest fields and they have to be reaped by hand; yet
they are always reaped. Why? Because every man, woman,
boy and girl, able to carry a sickle, goes to work; hence, there
are labourers in abundance.
Our Lord recognized that problem. He said, "The harvest
is plenteous but the labourers are few. Pray ye therefore the
Lord of the harvest, that he will send forth labourers into
His harvest" (Matt. ix. 37, 38). If we had a sufficient number
of labourers, the job could be done, but we have always
been short-handed. Today, with our increased population, the
labourers are as few, in comparison, as they were in the days
of Jesus. That is why we are continually appealing to young
men and women to volunteer for missionary service. We must
get more labourers.
SIXTH-BECAUSE WE HAVE NOT FOLLOWED THE PAULINE
METHODS
In z Timothy i. 2, we bave the Pauline method stated:
"And the things that thou hast heard of me among many
witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall
be able to teach others also." Paul's method was to teach
others, and then in turn they were to teach still otbers; thus
workers were provided, workers trained and equipped.
Now the best way to do that today is by means of Bible

THE PASSION FOR SOULS
Schools. The first thing we should do when we get to a foreign
feld is to establish a Bible School, train the workers that are
available, as soon as they have been won to Christ, and then
send them out as evangelists to their own people. The native
himself is the key to the situation. The foreign missionary can
never hope to evangelize the world. The day will never come
when we will be able to put a missionary from the homeland
in every village, town, and city throughout the world. Even
if we could, it would not be healthy.
Think of us calling
foreigners to become our pastors. It just isn't natural.
Jesus, you remember, trained the twelve; then the seventy.
Paul never became a pastor. He won converts, ordained
elders, and passed on. He placed the churches under native
leaderscip, and made them self-supporting from the very
first. They were living organisms. Living organisms will grow.
In Acts, chapter xix, verses eight to ten and verses eighteen
to twenty, we have a marvellous example of the Pauline
method. In two short years, we are told, all these in Asia heard
the Gospel. Asia covered a territory of approximately 50,000
square miles. There was a mighty revival. Books belonging
to various false cults were burned publicly; books costing
thousands of dollars, so great was the upheaval.
How did it happen?
Paul took charge of a school and
every day he taught. Most certainly he did not, himself,
travel throughout Asia and evangelize the country. So far as
the record goes, he stayed in one place, but he taught otaers;
then they in turn went everywhere preaching the Gospel, with
the results described in the nineteenth chapter. Wherever he
• went, he "preached and taught" (Acts xiv. 21). That method
cannot be improved upon. It will work everywhere.
The West Indies Mission has proved it. They started in
Cuba with a Bible School. Not a church, mark you, but a
Bible Schoal. Then they went to Haiti and established an-
other. Later they put one in the Dominican Republic and
another in Jamaica. Now they are starting a flith it one of
the French Islands. What has been the result? The students
in hundreds have gone frop their Bible Schools throughout the
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
length and breadth of the Islands of the West Indies, and more
than 80,000 have been won to the Lord Jesus Crist.
The old method had been followed for decades. Churches
had been built in the larger towns and cities, but the country
districts, where most of the people lived, were left untouched
and unevangelized. The West Indies Mission went in. The
Pauline method was adopted. Now annual conferences num-
ber upwards of 7,000 or more; so great has grown the Word of
God and multiplied.
In Ethiopia the missionaries had made but little headway.
There were only a handful of believers when I was
Then the natives therselves took over and during the Italian
occupation, in spite of imprisonment, floggings, and martyr-
20,000 were brought to Christ, and that without the
help of a single missionary. Today there are 50,000 Christians
and 300 native churches. What'a miracle! That is the ideal
way. It is the only method that really succeeds.
Such a method cuts down expenses. The natives can live
cheaper. No furloughs are necessary. They can be supported
by their own churches. Foreign funds are not required. All we
have to do is to support the missionary and his work, and leave
it to the natives to do the rest. The work then becomes self-
supporting, self-governing, and self-propagating. That is the
Scriptural way. The Pauline method cannot be improved upon.
SEVENTH-BECAUSE WE HAVE NOT BEEN CONVINCED THAT
THE HEATHEN ARE LOST
If they are not lost until they bear, then we had better
leave them as they are. If only those who definitely reject
Christ are to perish, we should never tell them about Him.
Better to leave them in their ignorance than to bring them
under condemnation. But the teaching of the whole Bible is
that men without Christ are lost and that their only hope of
salvation is in the Gospel.
It was this awful fact, as expressed by an atheist, that sent
Studd to the mission feld. "Did I firmly believe," he said,

acti
78
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
"as millions say they do, that the knowledge and practice of
religion in this life infuences destiny in another, religion to
me would be everything. I would cast aside earthly enjoy-
ments as dross, earthly cares as follies, and earthly thoughts
and feelings as vanity. Religion would be my first waking
thought and my last image before sleeping. I would labour
in its cause alone. I would take thought for the morrow of
eternity only. I would esteem one soul gained for heaven worth
a life of suffering. Earthly consequences would never stay my
hand or seal my lips. Earth, with its joys and its griefs, would
occupy no moment of my thoughts. I would strive to look
eternity alone, and on the immortal souls around me
so soon to be everlastingly miserable or everlastingly happy.
I would go forth into the world and preach to it in season and
out of season, and my text would always be: What shall it
profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own
Paul speaks of the heathen world in these words: "dead in
trespasses and sins, children of wrath, having no hope and
without God" (Eph. ii. I, 3, I2). Could language be plainer?
That is their condition. They are irretrievably and eternally
lost.
Now there are two passages that settle it once and for all.
The furst is Acts iv. I2, where it reads: "Neither is there
salvation in any other; for there is none other name under
heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved." None
of their gods, none of their religions can avail. The names of
Mohammed, Confucius, Buddha, and all others, are ruled out.
Christ, and Christ alone, can save.
ays: "No man cometh unto the Father but by ME."
other way to God. Christ or damnation.
declares. No one else can be. No one else is. If the heathen
are not lost, then these two verses do not mean what they say.
But you say it is unjust. You find fault with God.
think a God of love would not and could not permit it. Does
God owe us salvation? If so, then it is not of grace at all.
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
79
He is simply paying a debt. But we deserve nothing. It is all
of grace.
My friend, you can rest on one great statement and it is this:
"Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?" I do not
know what He will do, but I do know that He will be abso-
lutely just. He will do right. I can leave it in His hands. And
when at last I find out what He has done, I will be completely
satisfied, for I will say, "He did right. He did what I would.
have done had I been in His place.'
" We will agree with the
verdict of the angel: "True and righteous are Thy judg-
ments" (Rev. xvi. 7).
Remember, there are degrees of punishment. The Bible
speaks of many and of few stripes. The heathen, apart from
Christ, will never get to heaven, but they will be dealt with
fairly. It is a mystery now; it will be plain then. Meanwhile
it is our duty, responsibility, and privilege to give them the
Gospel and to do everything we can to win there to Christ.
DO NoT FAIL AGAIN
We all want to do the will of God, and we know that there
is nothing nearer to His heart than the evangelization of the
world. If we have failed in the past, that is no reason why we
should fail in the future. Let us then to our task. Let us work
while it is called today. The world must be evangelized. Why
not complete it in our own generation:
it may be that God is calling you and that He wants you
to go.
If so, obey the Spirit. Do not be disobedient to the
heavenly vision. Answer, "Here am I, Lord, send me." It
may be that He wants you to send a substitute. If so, earn as
much money as you can; but put that money back of some
substitute.
Send someone in your place. Do your part to
vangelize the world. It may be that He is calling you t
ray. Do not fail Him. Become an intercessor. Take Mission
on your heart. Pray the labourers out to the fields. Pray in
the money. Pray until the world has been evangelized.
