The Passion for Souls
Chapter 2: THE "HIGH RIGGER"

considered unique and out of the ordinary. Never will the
carefree lumberjacks of the Pacific Coast forget the shiver
that ran through them as they gazed at that reckless, nerveless,
fearless figure poised between earth and sky. It was an ex-
perience which one is forced to remember.
The tree had been chosen the day before a great tbree-
hundred-foot Douglas fir, almost five feet through at the base,
straight as a die and bare almost to the top. It was not an
unusual tree, at least for British Columbia, but a tree especially
chosen and well fitted for the "High Rigging."
The "High Rigger," a young fellow about nineteen, with a
merry face and a sort of happy-go-lucky expression on his
countenance, was the centre of observation, for that day at
east. Atter weeks of special practice, he had become one o:
he best "High Riggers
on the coast.
Springing at the trunk of the tree, with spikes on his shoes
and belt around his sleader waist, he tore up the fust fifty
feet like a squirrel, and was far above the group of sturdy
Turabermen standing below almost before they realized that
Up and up and up, higher and higher he mounted, while
the great top of the tree swayed and rocked back and forth
under his movements. Necks ached, eyes became blurred with
le strain and men lay down on their backs to watch. Exclam:
ons of delight and admiration were heard on every sid
19

THE PASSION FOR SOULS
spurning him on. Spontaneous outbursts of enthusiasta were
heralded skyward at every step. No wonder he worked! It
was his day, and he was there to do his best.
Presently
he stopped. Two hundred feet up! It was
enough. Now for work.
Wrenching his axe free he began
to chop. Round and round he went, swinging back on bis belt
and taking long, heavy strokes, while a shower of chips rained
down on the crowd below.
Two things he must watch; there were two possible accidents
which he must avoid. Should he miss his mark and cut the
strap that held him, all would be over. That had happened
only the week before on Vancouver Island, and the mangled,
crished body of the careless Finn had been picked up at the
foot of the tree two hundred feet below. Then, too, he must
be sure that the trunk was well cut, all around, lest, in break-
ing, the tree should split, and his body he cut in two by his
belt as the falling piece tore away the rest. That accident had
also occurred, and its memory was still fresh.
But he was on his guard, and all went well. The top of the
tree, cut through, came crashing to the earth, causing the lum-
bermen to spring on either side to avoid it. It was just then
that the "High Rigger" faced his real danger. From fifteen to
twenty fect, the trunk swings back and forth with the vibration
when the top breaks.
If he is not on the watch, he will fail to
go with it, and, as a result, his face will be pounded to a jelly.
Never could the men forget the "High Rigger" whose face
had been broken and beaten into a pulp as the tree struck him
again and again before he was able to throw himself into
motion with it, so violent had been the rebound.
• Suddenly he paused. What now? They had watched him
loosen his beit, jerk out his spikes and drop some twelve teet
to avoid a possible split, then plant them again, throw him-
self far back on his belt, brace his feet, set himseli and wait,
while the great top, one hundred feet above his head, cracked
broke and fell. They had seen him sway back and forth like
a statue, nerveless, powerless, motionless, until the mighty
vibration ceased.
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
And now, by all the laws of the "High Rigger,
" it was his
business to go to work and make ready the rigging. There was
the iron pulley, weighing five hundred and fifty pounds, that
must be hauled up by the "donkey" and hung on the top of
the tree. Ihrough this the big cable, an inch and a half thick,
must be passed, and the other end fixed to a similar tree
nearly a quarter of a mile away. Along this cable the logs,
great, mighty giants, not the toothpicks of Northern Ontario,
must be hauled, sometimes lifted, high into the air. Truly,
there was much to do. But he didn't do it. Instead, he did a
thing that made him the talk of the woods for months after.
Now, the diameter of the tree at the place where it had been
cut was just two feet. He had paused. They waited. And the
next moment—did they see a vision? Were their eyes deceiving
them? No, there he was poised between earth and sky, stand-
ing upright on a twenty-four-inch tree trunk, two hundred feet
above their heads.
They held their breath. There was a hush on the crowd of
reckless lumberjacks, as, with upturned faces, they watched
the fearless "Rigger." Save for the heavy breathing, not a
sound was heard. The heart of many a man thumped madly,
then almost stood still, while a cold shiver left him weak and
trembling, yet fascinated, for he could not withdraw his eyes.
There be stood in unmistakable outline against the blue
sky. Would he fall? Could he balance long enough to regain
his position? Presently he lifted his axe. Three feet fron
where he stood, the limb of another tree swayed back and
forth in the breeze. What was he doing? Were his senses
leaving him? What madness!
But see! The axe has fallen. The limb has been struck, nay,
severed and hurled to the ground. He bends. The watchers
gasp in breathless amazement. Slowly his body recovers its
equilibrium. And five minutes later he steps firmly and vic-
toriously on the ground, while a great cheer goes up from the
excited lumberjacks, as they throng around.
The "Fligh Rigger" had won his spurs.

22
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
That night the "High Rigger" could not sleep.
Hour after
hour he tossed from side to side, unable to rest. Spectres of
bygone days appeared before him. Deeds long since forgotten
retured once more. The old homestead, mother, the church
of his boyhood and a score of sacred memories flooded in upon
his bewildered mind.
"This will never do," he cried. "Whatever ails me to-
night?"
Raising himself on
his elbow, be listened until he was
assured that everyone in the bunk house was asleep, save
Then, quietly crawling out, he slipped into his
clothes and silently made his way to the open air.
It was bright moonligat. The great long shadows of the
trees fell across the clearing in distant outline. Each buak
house was clearly discernible. No noise disturbed the stillness
of the night. The mighty forest itself seemed wrapped in
Quickly gliding between the trees, he made bis way straight
for the spot where a few hours before he had performed his
marvellous feat, tbinking that the walk in the night air would
take away his sleeplessness and banish the memories that
annoyed him.
An hour later he returned and quietly crept into his bunk
again. Presently he dozed, but as he slept, visions strange
and unreal disturbed his slumber. Once again he was racing
up the tree, his spirit all aglow, eager to perform the daring
Taking out his axe, he began with feverish energy to
separate the top from the larger trunk. In a few moments he
had completed the cut. Then, as the upper part began to
sway, he suddenly dropped, and, sinking his spurs fumly
into the trunk, threw himself back on his belt, and waited
for the shock.
The next moment it came, but to his dismay
be failed to sway right, and the next thing he felt was the
pounding of the mighty trunk against his face, as the tree
vibrated back and forth until it seemed as though every bone
must be broken. He felt the hot, red blood gush forth, and
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
awakened to find his face covered with perspiration and his
nerves fluttering with excitement.
Again he siept. This time he was using his axe high up on
the trunk, supported only by his belt. Suddenly he missed his
stroke and in the twinkling of an eye his belt was severed. He
felt himself fall back throngh space, and, with a wild, un-
earthly shriek, he clutched for a limb but missed. Then there
came that awful sensation that had been his many a time when
as a boy he had dreamed that he was falling. In a moment it
was all over, as with a dull, heavy thud he struck the ground,
and awoke a second time, to find himself on the floor beside
his bunk.
Afraid to go to sleep again, he oace more left the bunk
house and wandered he knew not where among the great
Douglas firs. On and on he went, heeding neither time nor
direction, and, as he walked, there came to him again the
memories that be had been trying in vain to kide.
He was back in the great city. It was a year ago. A large
convention had been in progress for a week and he was there.
Drawn by the magnetic power of the speaker, or compelled
by sore undefined influence, he had suddenly left his seat
and joined a long line of young men and women at the front,
in response to a call for missionary volunteers. It was a thrill-
ing moment in his life. He could still feel the exaltation of
spirit he had felt on that momentous occasion.
Yes, and he had meant it, too. But soon the convention
losed and the great excitement subsided. Hard facts had tr
be faced and the cost counted. Gradually the sacred resolve
wore off as the glamour disappeared. Worldly attractions again
took hold of him, and within a few weeks be had succeeded in
drowning the inner Voice and forgetting, for the time at least,
Yet, every now and then, especially during the silent
moments, it demanded his attention and insisted on recog-
nition. Strive as he would, he could not altogether forget what
he had done. Finally, one day, in a fit of desperation, he had
boarded a train for the far West, and, to make a long story

24
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
short, had found himself ultimately a skilled "High Rigger"
in the great lumber camps of British Columbia. And now,
after a year had passed, and he believed that all was buried,
he bad been brought face to face once more with his Call.
For two hours be fought and struggled. The price be would
have to pay loomed up large before hịm. Nor was the sacrifice
invoived to be lightly ignored. The fame he had won as a
"High Rigger" drew him back to the woods. His freedom in
the lumber camp and the joy of the wild life be was living
made him hesitate and waver.
Presently, however,
there flashed across his mind the
memory of another who had tried to flee from God. And
in a moment he realized the uselessness of it all. Jonah had
fared badly.
: He might meet an even worse end. It would
be dangerous to evade the issue any longer.
Sinking down
to the ground, he placed his head between
his knees and sobbed as though his heart would break. Bitter
tears of penitence poured from his eyes, as, in broken sen-
tences, he wept out his confession and sought forgiveness for
his disobedience, pledging himself anew to God for missionary
service. And when it was all over, there settled down upor
aim a peace the like of which he had never known before
The "High Rigger" had been reclaimed.
CHAPTER II!
IS THE EVANGELIZATION OF THE WORLD THE SUPREME TASK
OF THE CHURCH?
TURN WITH me, if you will, to Ezekiel iii, verses 17
to ig. I am going to change some of the words in this
passage in order to bring it up to date. Note carefully
the changes. I want to make it applicable to the mission feld.
Now let us read, beginning at verse I7:
"Christian worker, I have made thee a watchman: therefore
hear the word at my mouth, and give warning from me. When
I say unto the heathen, Thou shalt surely die; and thou givest
him not warning, nor speakest to warn the heathen from his
heathenish way, to save his life; the same heathen shall die
in his iniquity; BUT his blood will I require at thine hand.
heathenism, nor from his heathenish way, he shall die in his
miquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul."
"His blood will I require at thine hand." When I read those
vords 1 tremble
"His blood will I require at thine hand."
Down through the years my life has been tremendous!
motivated by great missionary mottos. May I give you one
now that perhaps has meant more to me than any other. It is
his, "The supreme task of the Church is the evangelization o
he world." I believe that with all my heart. The most in
portant work of the church of Jesus Christ is world evangeliza-
WORLD
I am going to take three words in this motto and emphasize
them one by one. First of all, let me take the last word, the
"world." "The supreme task of the church is the
25

26
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
evangelization of the world." When God loved; He loved a
world. When He gave His Son, He gave His Son for a world.
When Jesus Christ died, He died for a world. God's vision is
a world vision. That is the vision He wants us to have.
So many of us are localized in our outlook. We see only our
own community, our own village or town, and ve never see
beyond. Ihere are those who think only of their own church
and have no interest in what others are doing. Then there are
some who have a larger vision. They see an entire city or
province and they are ready to give their money and to work
for its evangelization. But they, too, are local in their cut-
look, for they never see beyond the boundaries of the city or
province in which they live. Then there are those who have
a still larger vision. They see an entire country and they are
ready to work for its evangelization. But even they are local
in their outiook, for they never see beyond the boundaries of
the country in which they live. There are those, however, who
have a still larger vision. They see a continent and they are
ready to do all they can for the evangelization of their con-
tinent. Yet even they are local in their outlook for they never
see beyond the boundaries of their continent. Then there are
those who see an entire world. They see Europe, Asia, Africa,
North and South America and the Islands of the Seas. They
have God's vision and that is the vision He wants us to have,
a world vision.
Why is it that so many of us are local in our outlook?
Why do we think only of ourselves? Is God more interested
in these black people living here than He is in those yellow
people living there?
Is He more concerned about those brown
people than He is about those who are white? Is it because
we are so near-sighted that we do not have a world vision?
When I was leaving Jamaica I stepped into a plane. First of
all I saw only the local surroundings. Then as I rose higher,
I saw fields and farm houses. As I got higher still I was able
to see valleys and mountains in the distance. Finally I could
look down upon the entire Island of Jamaica, lying like a
jewel in the bosom of the Caribbean; and if I could have gone
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
27
high enough, 1 could have seen all the islands of the West
Indies at a single glance.
God, from His vantage point, can look down upon an entire
world and see every country, continent and island at the same
time. If we could only get far enongh away, we could see the
world as Jesus saw it.
But some of us have never travelled
and we have never listened to those who have travelled. We do
not study geography. We know but little oi what lies beyond.
Why is it that we think we are the people and that we are
more important than any of the other peoples of the world?
Everywhere I go I hear that sentiment expressed. When I was
in Great Britain I found the people there saying, "We're the
When I was in Australia and New Zealand, it was
the same, "We're the people." As I travel through the United
States I hear it on every side, "We're the people." I was once
on a little bit of an island in the Pacific and even there the
natives were saying, "We're the people." They used to talk
to me something like this,
"You Americans,
" they would say,
"why is it that you live away out on the outer fringe of civiliza-
tion? Why don't you live nearer to the centre of things?"
The idea was that we Britishers and Americans live afar off,
out on the outer fringe of civilization, while they, those natives
on that island in the Pacific, live at the bub. The trouble was
they were localized in their outlook, they did not have a word
vision. They thought taey were the most important people of
Is it, I wonder, because we think we are the most numerous?
Some of us, I am afraid, do not realize that there are other
nations in the world with even larger populations, that we
are not the only pebbles on the beach.
I was in the Dutch East Indies and I travelled through the
Isiand of Java. I found that I could cross it, from one end to
the other, in about twelve hours and from North to South in
about four hours. Will you believe me when I tell you that
Java is one of the most densely populated spots on the face
of the earth? There are fifty million people on that little island.
I could put fifteen Javas in Canada and have lots oi 1oom

28
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
to spare, yet Java contains inore than one-third of tee popu-
lation of the United States.
If God is interested it numbers,
then God is more interested in Java than He is in my country,
the Dominion of Canada, for whereas there are fiteen million
people in Canada, there are, as I have already stated, fifty
million in Java.
If God is interested in numbers, then He is more interested
in the Uaited States than He is in Java, for whereas there are
fifty million in Java, there are one hundred and fifty million
in the United States of America. But again, if God is interested
in numbers, then He is more interested in Rassia than Fe is
in the United States, for whereas there are one hundred and
fifty million in the States, there are two hundred million in
Russia. Russia is the largest white nation on the face of the
earth-two hundred million. But once again, if God is in-
terested in numbers, then He is more interested in India than
He is in Russia, for whereas there are two hundred million in
Russia, there are four hundred million in India, just twice the
population. But, last of ell, if God is interested in numbers,
then He is more interested in China than He is in India, for
whereas there are four hundred milion in India, there are
four bundred and seventy-five million in China, the largest
nation in the world. Every fifth baby bom into the world is
born a Chinese.
Someone has said,
"God must love the
Chinese because He has made so many of them."
And my country, the Dominion of Canada, viewed from the
standpoint of numbers, is only a little pin point on the map.
And if the waters of the Atlantic and the waters of the Pacific
should rise overnight and submerge Canada, I suppose next
morning there would be a report in the American newspapers
about an inch deep, stating,
"Last night Canada disappeared
from the farnily of nations." That is all we amount to. We
just don't amount to anything when it comes to numbers.
Why then should we conceive of ourselves as the people?
Why should we be local in our outlook? Why should wre
think of ourselves as more important than any of the other
penples of the world? Why should God be more interested
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
29
in us than in other nations? Oh that He would give us a
• world vision, that we might work for the evangelization of
the entre world, the world for which Christ died, and that
we might see the world as He sees it.
Now let us look at another word in our motto, the word
"supreme." "The supreme task of the Church is the evangeliza-
tion of the world."
If world evangelization is our most important work, then
when a missinary convention is held we should lay everything
else aside and be present at every session, otherwise we are
putting something else first, and we do not believe that it is
more important than anything else. We show by our actions
that we put missions second.
In the second place, if world evangelization comes first, then
we should concentrate on giving to missions and let others who
lo not have the vision, contribute to other things. There wil
always be plenty for the home work, for there are always
those who put the home work first. The many worthwhile
objects here at home will be cared for, since only the minority
will be interested in the supreme task of the Church.
If we put missions first, then we will give more to missions
than to anything eise. Otherwise something else takes first
place. There are business men here and each one has his own
business enterprise. Now there is one department in your bust-
ness that you look upon as more important than any other
• department. Where then do you put most of your surplus
money? Why into that most important department, of course.
Way do you do that? Because you want to develop the most
important department of your business enterprise. So it is
with missions. If world evangelism is the most important work
of the church, then we should put most of our money into this
most important department. Otherwise, we do not put missions
first and we do not believe that world erangelization is the
supreme task of the church. I find very few rainisters who

THE PASSION FOR SOULS
really believe that the evangelization of the world is their
most important work.
This leads me to say that every church should spend more
on missions than it spends on itself. That is only logical. If
that world evangelization comes first, then we
should invest more money in the regions beyond than we
use for ouselves here at home.
"But," you ask, "what about your church? What about
The Peoples Church in Toronto of which you are Pastor?
Does your church send more to the foreign field than it spends
on itself?" I am glad to be able to say that there never has
been a year since I have been Pastor of The Peoples Church
that we have used anything like as much on ourselves at home
as we have sent to the foreign fields of earth.
Last January I asked our auditors, through our treasurer,
two questions.
"How much did we spend on our-
selves last year?" After they had examined the books I got
the answer. "Dr. Smith," they said, "last year, you used
$39,000 on your work at home." Then I asked my second
question,
"How much did we send to the foreign field? How
much was raised for missions?" Again I got the answer.
"Last year, you gave $282,000 to missions."
"Fine," I said,
"but are you sure you are not mistaken? Did we not use
on ourselves at home and give only $39,000 to
missions?" "No," they said,
"we are not mistaken. You
gave $282,000 to missions and you used only $39,000 on your-
selves at home." "Splendid," I replied,
"that is the way it
always has been and that is the way it should be." And if
the time ever comes when the offcials of The Peoples Church
decide to spend more here at home and less on missions, they
will get my resignation without a moment's hesitation. I would
not want to be the pastor of a church that would use more,
selfishly, here at home than it sent to the regions beyond.
I am glad we gave $282,000 to missions and that we spent only
$39,000 on ourselves.
When I. became Pastor of The Peoples Church in Toronto,
many years ago now, I was told everything except one thing,
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
on the Sunday morning that I was to preach my first
sermon, the treasurer approached me with a very grim ex-
pression on his countenance. "Dr. Smith," he said,
told you everything there is to
tell you about this church
except one thing." Then he paused. I waited for him to con-
tinue with what he was going to say. In a moment be went
on. "This church," he said,
"is deeply in debt. We owe a
great deal of money and we have nothing in the ireasury."
And then he looked at me as though he expected me to put
my hand in my pocket, take out the money and give it to
him, telling him to run away and pay the bills.
Instead, I turned and went into the pulpit and as I went,
"Lord," I said, "I have been wanting to find out
for a long time whetner or not a certain passage in Thy Word
is true." True, I meant, from a practical standpoint. I referred
to that verse,
"Seek ye first the kingdom of God (the exten-
sion of God's kingdom world-wide) and all these things shall be
added unto you." That moming I preached a missionary sermon.
Sunday evening came. It was my first Sunday. I should
bave brought an evangelistic message, but again I felt led to
speak on missions, and I did so. Then I asked the people to
come back every night that week. They came, and on Monday
wight I gave them missions again. On Tuesday they got
ing numbers, perhaps more out of curiosity than for any other
reason, and once again they got a dose of missions.
nen, i suppose they folded their arms, saying one to a
This new pastor of ours, we cannot understand hir
Ele doesn't seem to have any sermons except on missions.
But the second Sunday is coming. Perhaps then ho will really
start to preach."
The second Sunday came. I can remember it as though it
were yesterday. At the morning service I made an announce-
"We are going to hold three services today," I said,
"and take up three missionary offerings: one this morning,

32
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
another this afternoon and the last one tonight." Some of
them seemed to look at me in amazement, but I had started
my work, assisted by one missionary, with an attempt at a
missionary convention, and I was determined to see it through.
That morning I spoke on missions and took up a missionary
offering. I did the same in the afternoon and again at night.
Here I was, hardly saying a word about home needs and yet
taking all the money I could get from them for missions. But
now for the sequel.
They became so interested, so aroused, so awakened, that
they came in ever-increasing numbers. Souls were saved and
in a very short time every seat was taken. Before long they
had caught the vision and they began to give, to give as they
had never given before, and in a few weeks, without having
to say hardly anything about the local obligations, every debt
was paid, every bill met, and from that day to this we have
not kown the meaning of the word "debt in connection
with our work. We discovered that when we put first things
first, God worked.
The trouble with the average church is that the cart is put
• before the horse and then the pastor is told to get up on the
seat and drive, and of course he finds the going bard. If
only we would reverse the order and accept God's plan, we
would get somewhere and the going would be easy. Seek first
the extension of God's kingdom world-wide, and all things
will be added. God's programme never fails.
If I were to be called to another church, and it I should find
that church in debt, I would do again exactly what I did before.
I would hold a great missionary convention, raise as much
watch God work.
CHURCE
The third word I want to emphasize is the word "Church."
"The supreme task of the church is the evangelization of the
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
33
world." When I think of the church I think of the whole
church, and not merely of a department or an organization in
the church. For instance, we do not have any Women's Mis-
sionary Society in The Peoples Church. Wenever have had such
an organization and we never will. Not because I am against
sach a society. I thank God for every Women's Missionary
Society. Sometimes the only missionary light that shines is
the light that shines from a Women's Missionary Society. But
I can show you in two minutes why it would be impossible
for us to have such an organization.
Suppose I were to gather together a little group of women,
a dozen or more, and suppose I were to say to those women,
"Now you are to become a Women's Missionary Society, and
your work will be the work of evangelizing the world.
is all you have to do, just evangelize the world." What then
would I be saying to everyone else and to all the ober
organizations in the church? I would be saying, "This is not
the most important work of the church. It is only a side issue,
just one of the many departments of church work. Let these
women look after it. They can take care of the evangelization
of the world; and the rest of us—those of us who are men-
we will do something really worthy of our manhood."
No, my friends! Every man in my church is a meraber of
the Women's Missionary Society. And I see to it, as far as
possible, that every one of the eighty or more members of
my choir accepts his or her responsibility; that each one of my
elders, managers and deacons, a hundred and twenty, shoulders
the burden; that every usher, every Sunday School teacher
and officer and every boy and girl, contributes to missions.
We do not have the parents give for the children. We teach the
children to give for themselves. From the time they are five
or six years of age, they are taught to give systematically.
Then when they grow up we have no trouble with them. They
have learned how to give
a lot it the too impostant to band over wemy une
It belongs to the whole church, and when every.
one catches the vision and everyone does something, then our

34
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
goal is reached and our budget met. Our motto is, "Everv
Christian a missionary." It is the work of the whole church.
HOW IS II DONE?
Everywhere 1 go 1 am asked the question,
"How do you
get such offerings? Where does the money come from? Xou
must have a church of millionaires." That is what the editor
of Canada's Roman Catholic paper thought when he saw the
report in the daily press. He wrote and asked me if it were
so, and when I replied in the negative, he was astonished. He
wrote a long article in his Roman Catholic publication, stating
that one Protestant church, led, as he said, by a zealous pastor,
gave more to missions than all the Catholic churches from
Ontario to the Coast put together. "We," he said,
true custodians of the Faith, and yet we allow one Protestant
church to outdo us. Shame on us." His thought, of course,
was to stir up the Catholics to do more. No, we have no
millionaires. As a matter of fact, we do not have any rea
wealth in our church. Our gifts come from a multitade of
ordinary people.
At one time an offcial of the Foreign Mission Board of a
large lenomination asked me for the secret, and wanted to
know why the giving of his denomination had decreased. "Dr.
So-and-So," I said, "you have put missions in the budget and
you appeal to the people for a dead, cold budget and then
you divide the money as you see fit. It will never do. World-
wide evangelism is too important to be put in a budget. You
will have to pull it out of the budget and put it on the plat-
form where the people can see it.
You will have to go back
to the great missionary rallies of the days of the Student Volun-
teer Movement, when multitudes of young men and women
were inspired to go. People will never give to a budget. They
must have inspiration." He admitted that I was right.
How do we get it? Perhaps if I were to tell you how we do
NOT get it, it would help. We do not raise it by means of
suppers, bazaars, concerts, rummage sales, or oyster stews.
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
35
Not because I am against these methods, but because they will
not work.
What does a business man do when he runs across
a method that will not work? He scraps it, does he not?
Now listen. I am responsible, humanly speaking, for the per-
sonal support of three hundred and fifty missionaries. Every
month of my life I have to get approximately $20,000, or,
humanly speaking, they will starve. How many of you busi
ness men carry as heavy a responsibility? What would you
do if you bad to get $20,000 every month, and if three hun-
dred and fifty workers were dependent upon it?
pause long enough to say that never once has God failed.
Whether I am at home or on some foreign field, or holding
evangelistic campaigns in Great Britain or Australia, the
money comes in and the allowances go out.
Now tell me if you ever knew a rummage sale to produce
$20,000. If not, then what good is it? Do you blane me for
• scrapping a method that will not produce what I need? I have
never known it to happen. Well then, what do I do? I turn
to another method, of course, a method that will bring in the
amount needed. A lot of people have an idea that when
George Mueller died, George Mueller's God died. God is not
dead. Elijah's God still lives today. He can work the neces-
sary miracle.
"Said I nut unto thee, that, if thou would
believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God? All things are
possible to him that believeth.
very year for more than a quarter ot a century now, wi
ave held a missionary convention. It used to last for on
week. Now we hold it for four weeks and five Sundays.
After giving the people a vision of missions, morning, after-
noon and night, we take up a faith-promise offering. Our
people indicate the amount they will contribute during the
next twelve months. Does it work? Let me give you two
Park Street Church, Boston, asked me to hold an evangel-
stic campaign. I did so. The auditorium was crowded, with
nany standing on the steps, and score upon scores, mostly
young people, found Christ. Dr. Harold Ockenga, the Pastor,

THE PASSION FOR SOULS
asked me to come into his office. "Dr. Smith," he said,
church has never had a missionary convention in the one hun-
dred and thirty-five years of its history. We understand that
you holä one every year. Would you be willing to come to
Park Street and hold one for us?" I asked Dr. Ockenga how
much his church was, at that time, contributing to missions.
His answer was, $3,200 a year. Next year I took a group of
missionaries and held a convention in Park Street Church. I
went back every year for six years. Last year Park Street
gave over $200,000 to missions. Think of it! A few years ago
$3,200, now, over $200,000. All the result of an annual mis-
sionary convention.
The other example is my own church. I held my first con-
vention some thirty years ago. The offering for that year
was $3,500. I held the last one this year. The offering was
$2g0,000. The total offerings have now run well over three
million dollars. That is what conventions do. That is the way
the people get a vision, and when they get a vision they give.
That is not hard. Any church can do it. All you have to
do is to see that each one catches the vision and that every
one takes part. Years ago our contributions averaged $5.00
each per year. But-with three thousand givers, we had
$15,000 for missions. Later they averaged $1o.ou each and
we had $30,000 for the year. Then they averaged $I5.00. That
gave us 345,000 for missions. And that was only child's play.
Almost any boy can earn $15.00 in a year. Why, it is only
over $1.00 a month. My son, Paul, made and sold humbugs
years ago, and gave that much. I have domestics giving more
than twice as much. Finally the average was $55.00 each.
All you have to do, you see, is to give the whole church the
vision and when each one becomes a systematic giver, the
problem is solved.
Some day millions upon millions from heathenism will march
by the throne, and pointing a finger of scorn at us, they will
ry "No man cared for my soul." And then you and I will
THE PASSION FOR SOULS
37
brother's blood crieth unto me from Africa, from China, from
the islands of the sea." The voice of thy brother's blood. Yes,
and you will go into heaven, saved, butwith blood on your
hands, the blood of those you might have won had you gone
or sent someone in your place.
it is no light thing to be a watchman. "His blood will I
require at thine hand." What are you going to do about it?
