The Passion for Souls
Chapter 13: HOW CAN WE HAVE REVIVAL TODAY

E COME now to the heart of the matter. When will
there be revival? That is the question that must

) \ now be answered. The church of today is in a pitiful
condition. Revival is imperative. Nothing short of a great
wave of evangelistic fervour and enthusiasm will ever restore
God’s people to their spiritual heritage. Let us then faco the
question, “When will there be revival?”

There will be revival when God’s people pay the price and
when I say that I realize that certain objections will be raised,
Iam perfectly familiar with the fact that there are two distinct
views in regard to revival. There are those’ who ‘ell us that
revival cannot be worked up; it must be prayed down and
that, therefore, we have nothing whatever to do with it. God
is sovereign. He works when He wants to work and no man
can ever hinder or hurry Him, Our part is to pray. We can
do uo more. Then there is the other view, the View that man
has groat deal to do with it and that after all, he is responsible.

It reminds me of two farmers. The one takes a look at his
fields and says to himself, “I would like to have a crop this
year. However, it is none of my business. There is nothing
I can do about it,” and with that he goes into his house, sits
dovn jn front of the open grate fire and prays for a crop. The
other farmer. says, “T, too, would like to have a crop this year
and there is a great deal for me to do. I am sure I can have
one if I do my part.” He goes to work. He ploughs the ground.
He barrows and zolls it and then he plants the seed and after
he has done all that he knows is necessary, he then looks to
God to send the sunshine and the rain and with perfect confi-
dence, looks forward to the days of harvest.

zar

i2z THE PASSION FOR SOULS

Which of the two farmers would you prefer? I think, with-
out a moment's hesitation, I would choose the second, As a
matter of fact, he is the only one using common sense. So it
is with revival. God sends it, I know, but there is a great
deal that you and J can do, a great deal that you and I will
have to do before there can be revival. It is my conviction,
and I base what I have to say on my own personal experience,
as well as on the histories of the revivals I have studied, it is
my conviction, I say, that any church, or any community,
can have a revival at any time, if it wants to pay the price.
Charles G. Finney proved again and again that he could have
a revival anywhere if he met the conditions. Oftentimes he
went to a community, barren and indifferent, where the people
showed no interest at all’ in the things of God. He met the
conditions, and as a result even in those communities, there
was @ great sweeping revival.

‘As a matter of fact, revival always comes in days of spiritual
declension. When the need is the greatest God pours water on
the thirsty ground and on the parched soil. It is then it is
needed most, There never was a darker day in England than
the day in which John Wesley carried on bis work, but it was
in that day that revival broke out everywhere. It was so in
connection with the great Irish revival of 1839 and the Welsh
sevival of 1904. It was so in the United States of America in
the days of Charles G. Finney. It is so today and if ever we
needed a revival, it is now.

If then revival depends upon us, if we must meet the con-
ditions, if we must pay the price, then what are the conditions,
what is the price that must be paid?

ConFEssion AND REsTITUTION

When we get right with God, there will be revival. How
do we get sight? by confession and restitution. Let me quote,
if T may, Psalm lxvi. 18, “If J regard iniquity in my heart,
the Lerd will not heer me.” God will not even bend down
and listen to what J have to say if 1 am harbouring sin in my

THE PASSION FOR SOULS 223

heart. No one may lmow anything about it but if it is there,
God sees it, and unless 1 confess it and put it away, God wil
not listen to my prayer,

Let me also quote Isaiah lix. r, 2, “Behold, the Lord’s hand
isnot shortened, that it cannot save; neither his ear heavy, that
it cannot hear: but your iniquities have separated between you
and your God, and your sias have hid his face from you, that
he will not hear.” The fault is not God's, the fault is mine,
God's arm is tong enough. He can reach lost men and women
and save them. The picture is that of a man who has fallea
into the water and is being swept away by the current. Men
xeach out their hands in a vain effort to save him, but they
fail because their arms are not long enough. But that is not
true of God’s arm. He can reach the drowning man. God is
able to save. Where then is the trouble? “Your sins,” He
says, “your iniquities.” Like a cloud, man’s sin hides the face
of God, separates man from God 30 that God is unable to
resoue and save, The fault lies with man.

Now, my friend, if you are a Christian, in all probability
you have a besetting sin. You have been delivered from most
of your sins but there is one that holds you in bondage, that
dogs your footsteps wherever you go. It may oaly be a habit,
something that you try to persuade yourself is harmless, yet
there it is and it comes between you and God. Perhaps you
have beea living 2 life of sinning and repenting by tums; there
has been no clear break. You still indulge every now and
again, In a moment of weakness, you surrender yourself to
your besetting sin. Tt now has a Hold on you that you are
unable to break. You want it, however, as a sweet more)
and you will not let it go. You know what it is and God
knows what it is. Now it is that sin that robs you of divine
power, It is the sin that makes it impossible for God to
use you, and until you confess it and put it away, for-
saking it utterly, you will not be right with God. Have
you then tumed from everything you Imow to be wzong,
or are you allowing de¥berate, Known sin in your life? Tt
is for you to answer.

24, THE PASSION FOR SOULS

Not only must there be confession; there must also be
restitution. Wrongs must be made right. Tt you have injured
others, apologies may be in order. To be right with God is to
be right with man; to be wrong with man is to be wrong with
God. You cannot be right with God and at the same time
wrong with your feliowmen. You must have a conscience void
of offence. Perhaps there are debts that will have to be paid.
If you will humble yourself before the Lord and give yourself
to prayer, allowing the Spirit of God to search you and try
you, He will zeveal everything. You will know the wrongs
that have to le made right, the sins that must be forsaken. I
Raow of no other way to get right with God, except by means
of confession, renunciation and restitution. Sin is the one great
barrier. That barrier must be removed at all costs.

‘When I was converted in the year 1906 in the great Torrey-
Alexander campaign which was heid in Massey Hell, Toronto,
I noticed, as I walked along the streets or through the stores,
or rode in the streetcars, thousands of little white cards, one
inch wide and six inches long. On both sides these four words
were printed in bright red type, “Get Right with God.” Tt
made no difference which way the card fell, the message was
always there. As a result, thousands were convicted. So many
tens of thousands of these little white cards bad been distri-
puted that it was impossible to get away from them. Every-
‘body saw them. They were lying about on evety side and those
four litle words preached a sermon that could never be for-
gotten,

Jk is just that that is needed for revival. God’s people
must get right and as soon as they do, they will be well on the
way towards revival for the stones will have been gathered
out of the way, fhe choked channel cleared and the. way
opened for the out-pouring of the Spirit of God.

Travau. is PrayER

When we learn how to iravail in prayer there will be revival.
Isaiah Ixvi. 8 iells us that “as soon as Zion travailed, she

THE PASSION FOR SOULS 125

brought forth her children.” Can a baby be born without
pain? Is it possible to give birth to a child without travail?
Most certainly not. God has ordained that every new Iife
brought into the world is accompanied by pain and suffering,
‘Travail is inescapable. So it is with newborn babes in the
family of God. Somebody has sufered; someone has iravailed.
There has been soul agony. It is because there is so little
travail today that there are so few souls saved. My friend, we
will have to get back to the days of soul travail if we are to
pray effectively. Once agein there will have to be helf nights
and whole nights of prayer and those who pray will have to
earn to take hold of the homs of the altar and travail in prayer
if souls are to be born into the kingdom and revival is to come.

Most evangelists take with them a song-leader. Finney took
a pray-er, Father Nash, you emember, and while Finney was
preaching, Nash was praying. Somewhere out in the woods
this mighty prayer warrior would bury his face in his hands
and in agony of soul, cry out to God to use Finney to the
conversion of lost men and women. Finney, himself, knew
what it was to travail in prayer. William Bramwell agonized
for some thirty-six hours in a sand pit without food, for the
souls of men. All God’s servants, right down through the
centuries, have travailed in prayer. Those who know how to
travail, know what I am talking about, for soul travail is part
of the price that must be paid for revival.

‘WirnessiNG FoR CHRIST

When we boldly witness for Christ, there will be revival.
We must get back to the preaching of the Word. It is nct our
word, but God’s Word that convicts dnd converts. His Word
is a hammer and it breaks hard hearts. It is a sword and it
pierces. It is a fire and it bums. God’s people, I say, must
boldly proclaim the Word if there is to be revival.

In my study of revival and evangelism I have discovered
thet those mightily used of God always majored on five
subjects. These five subjects inevitably produced conviction.

126 THE PASSION FOR SOULS

First, sin and salvation, then heaven and hell, finally, judg-
ment, You see, a greatimany messages must necessarily be
given on sin for sin must be exposed if there is to be genuine
conviction, There you have the disease and the disease makes
evident the need. ‘When I speak of dealing with the subject
of sin, T am thinking niore particularly of unbelief and the
rejection of Christ. Tam ashamed of the obscene booklets
that are occasionally being published in the name of evan-
gelism. I wonder that the government does not ban them.
Certainly I would not want the minds of may young people to
be corrupted by them. But the fact that men are sinners in
the sight of God must be definitely emphasized.

‘Then there must be salvation, namely, the remedy, the cure
for the disease. Hence salvation messages are essential. But
more than that is needed. Souls must be brought face to face
with etemity, hence the necessity of messages concerning
heaven and hell. Eternity must be made real. Men must
realize that this life does not end all and that they must begin
to give thought to the life to come. But even that is not suffi-
cient. There must also be messages on the judgment, Man
must know that he is going to be called to an account, that
some day he must meet his Creator. Hence the importance of
the warming, “Prepare io meet thy God” (Amos iv. 12). Vow
if these five subjects aré presented, in one way and another,
there is bound to be conviction, salvation, and ultimately,
revival, All these are the subjects that were dealt with by the
‘Apostles and these are the subjects that have been exaphasized
during days of revival and evangelism all through the centuries.

Tas ANOINTING OF THE SPIRIT

When we work in the anointing of the Holy Spirit, there
will be revival, The Holy Ghost is the One who does the
work. He is the Executor of the Godhead. This is His day.
He works upon the hearts of men, producing conviction and
imperting saving faith. He is the One through whom men are
born again. It is the Holy Spirit who takes the Word as it

THE PASSION FOR SOULS xy

is proclaimed and applies it. Hence we must d

Him. We most make cortain that we have bees segig03
and that we are preaching with the unction of the Spirit at
God upon us. .

‘All down the centuries those used of God have been anointed
mon. They have waited in God's presence until they hace
been endued with power from on High and then they have
gone forth conquering and to conquer. Everyone to whon
Charles G, Finney spoke that first memorable day was later
converted, even though he only passed the time of day. Finney
had been ancinted as he sat in bis own office after having bees
converted a few hours before and in the power of that ancinting
he had spoken to this one and that one, and conversion haa
resulted,

‘John Wesley was an anointed man, as was George Whitfield.
You remember how Wesley himeelf describes the experience
that was his at about three o'clock in the moming while he
and a number of others were in prayer. D.L. Moody, too,
vwas an anointed man, ‘You recall how he asked God to stay
His hand, so great was the anointing he received. Thea
tells us that he took the same sermons he had preached before,
swith but few resulis, and preached them again and eaw men
and women stricken and saved on every sige, Evan Roberis
also was an anointed man. His story would be incomplete
were that great experience omitted. You remember he met
God and it was in the power of that anointing that he swept
through Wales like a fre-brand, kindling revival everywhee
he went. The early Methodist preachers were all anointed
mea and throughout the country, on both sides of the Atlantic,
revival fires were kindled as they proclaimed the Gospel
message.

Those who minister may not recognize it, but upon all men
mightily used of God there rests a mysterious power, and tt 3
because of that power they get the results ihat amaze and
starile men everywhere. Thay are clothed, as il were, with the
Holy Spirit Himself. Oh, my brethren, itis this anointing that
wwe need today. So many of us are powerless, so much of our

128 THE PASSION FOR SOULS

work is done from an intellectual standpoint, so much is
superficial, that we must tum again to our one and only
_ source of power, the blessed Holy Spirit of God.

Well, now, are we willing to pay the price? Will you be
cone of those «who will accept the burden for revival and, meet-
ing the conditions, do your part until revival comes? God's
purpose must be fulfilled. Oh, then, let us joio hands with
those who are praying for revival, and let us obey the com-
mand of the great apostle and “do the work of an evangelist.”
