Growing Up, Spiritually
Chapter 2: 2 BABYHOOD

"As newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of 
the word, that ye may grow thereby:"
—I Peter 2:2
Here in Peter the Bible speaks about Christians 
being "newborn babes." No one is born a full grown 
human naturally and physically. They are born babies, 
and then they grow up. Similarly no one is born a full 
grown Christian. You are born a spiritual babe, and 
then you grow up.
There's a whole sermon in just that fact. We are 
going to be held accountable for the spiritual babies 
born into the family of God around our altars and in 
our churches.
I pastured nearly twelve years and really you don't 
expect too much out of babies because they can't do 
too much for themselves. Someone else though can do 
something for them.
13

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
Too many times someone is saved on Sunday night 
and if they make a mistake before Wednesday night 
everyone in the church knows it, and is already fussing 
about it. They expect him to be living, by Wednesday 
night or the next Sunday, just as good a Christian life 
as they do when it took them years to get where they 
are.
A number of years ago I held a two-week meeting 
for a particular minister. We were scheduled to go 
longer but I cut it off.
Crowds were coming. The auditorium would seat 
800 and it was comfortably full every night. People 
were responding. We weren't really having 
evangelistic services—I was doing a lot of teaching 
and praying for the sick—yet on Saturday night when I 
gave the invitation first for people to be saved, thirty-
three adults came for salvation.
They stood across the front as I prayed with them 
and led them in a prayer. Then I sent them back to the 
prayer room where others would pray with them while 
I went on ministering to the sick.
The thing that so impressed me about this service 
was that of the thirty-three who came for salvation so 
many were young married couples who looked to be 
between the ages of twenty-five to thirty-two. I learned 
later not one or the group had ever been a Christian; 
not one was a member of any church. I asked the 
14

BABYHOOD
pastor after the service about these young people.
He said, "None of the thirty-three were backsliders. 
They were all sinners who came to be saved."
That was unusual. I asked him if he knew any of 
them.
He said, "I don't know a one of them. They've 
never been to my church before."
I asked him, "Did you get their names and 
addresses?"
He said, "Oh brother, I just figure if they got 
anything they'll be back. You don't have to worry 
about them."
I said, "I'm closing the meeting tomorrow night."
People are born babies. They need to be seen 
about. They had never been to that church before. 
They had never heard any Full Gospel preaching 
before. They needed to be followed up and prayed 
with, talked to, and dealt with. They were newborn 
babies.
After a leading healing evangelist held a meeting in 
a certain city a pastor who had cooperated with it said 
to me, "I'm never going to cooperate with another one 
of those city-wide meetings. Never another one."
"Why?" I asked.
"I didn't get a person out of it," he said. "Not a one. 
Not a member. It didn't do me a bit of good in the 
world."
15

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
"It didn't?"
"No."
I asked him, "Did you get cards on any of the folks 
who came to the altar?"
"Oh yes," he said, "they gave me some cards. But 
none of them ever showed up."
I was talking to another pastor in the same town 
about the same meeting and he said, "We got twenty-
nine new members out of that meeting. I wish he 
would come back."
"How did you get them?" I asked. "How did they 
happen to come to your church?"
He said, "Oh they didn't know anything about our 
church. I got the cards on some of them and visited 
them. I didn't just encourage them to come to our 
church, but I insisted they get in some good Full 
Gospel church and go on with God. And some of them 
came to ours."
We are responsible for babies. Babies don't know. 
Babies can't do for themselves. A newborn baby in the 
natural can't do much. He doesn't walk yet. He doesn't 
dress himself. In fact, he doesn't do anything for 
himself. About all he does is eat. And about all he eats 
is milk. Spiritually there are newborn babes. And if 
they get the sincere milk of the Word, they will grow 
thereby.
16

BABYHOOD
Innocence
The first thing that attracts you to a baby is its 
innocence. People say, "You sweet little innocent 
thing." No one thinks of a baby as having a past. It 
doesn't have one.
Do you know something? If you are a newborn 
babe in Christ, you don't have any past. You may have 
been as mean as the devil. You may have been the 
worst wretch that ever walked. But no matter how you 
may have lived, when you were born-again you 
became a new man in Christ Jesus and you don't have 
any past. God looks at you as an innocent babe.
II CORINTHIANS 5:17 17
Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new 
creature (creation): old things are passed away; 
behold, all things are become new.
Even though innocence belongs to the babyhood 
stage of Christianity, it is one characteristic we should 
never outgrow. We should maintain this state of 
innocence for the simple reason that if we don't, we 
will fall under the condemnation of the devil and be 
defeated in spiritual life.
A new convert is simple, full of faith, ready and 
willing to learn. We should always maintain that 
teachable spirit. Yet sometimes when we grow older 
we sort of come to the place where we have a "know-
17

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
it-all" attitude; a "You-can't-tell-me-anything" attitude. 
Those people no one can help, including God Himself.
A group of men gathered in back of the auditorium 
after service one night in one of the churches I 
pastored. As I walked up to shake hands with them one 
of the deacons said, "Brother Hagin, what do you think 
about..." and he mentioned a certain Bible subject. I 
found out later he did that purposely to bring me into 
their discussion.
"Well, I don't know just where your discussion is," 
I said, "and whether I could fit in or not."
The man the deacon really wanted to help spoke up 
immediately, "Well, I'll tell you. You or anyone else 
can't tell me a thing in the world about that Bible 
subject. I know all there is to be known on it. I know 
all about it."
I said, "If you do, you've got me beat. And if you 
do, you have every other preacher beat that I've ever 
seen or known of, or any other person."
He said, "Well, I know all about it. No one can tell 
me a thing about it."
But to tell the truth, that fellow was the biggest 
baby in the entire church. He didn't know all about it at 
all.
Keep an open spirit and a teachable spirit, as well 
as an innocent spirit, toward God and man.
18

BABYHOOD
Ignorance
Our two children are grown now with families of 
their own. In observing our babies and grand-babies I 
know this—a baby seems to think everything he can 
get his hands on is intended for his mouth.
A newborn puts his hands in his mouth. As he 
grows a little older and learns to crawl across the floor 
if he finds a screw it goes in his mouth, if he finds a 
spoon it goes in his mouth, if he finds a spider it goes 
in his mouth.
Babies are ignorant concerning these things. They 
don't know what should go in their mouths and what 
shouldn't. And babies have died as a result of not 
knowing that. They have gotten hold of something 
poisonous and it killed them.
In one case I know of, a 14 month old baby, 
crawling across the floor, picked up some spoiled food 
left there perhaps by an older child. Before they could 
get the baby to a doctor, it died. An autopsy revealed 
the poisonous food. The parents went back home and 
found some of the food on the floor of a room which 
was seldom used. That little one didn't know he 
shouldn't eat it. He was ignorant concerning the effect 
it would have.
What am I getting to? The same thing is true 
spiritually speaking. We need to be careful what goes 
19

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
into our spiritual mouths. We need to be as careful 
about what we read as we are about what we eat 
physically. Christians many times think nothing at all 
of gulping down some poisonous doctrine which will 
poison life spiritually, rob them of their spirituality, 
and ruin their testimony if they accept it.
A number of years ago a denominational minister 
was filled with the Holy Spirit and had a marvelous 
experience with God. I'll guarantee you this much, I 
know of no greater soul winner in any church than that 
man. He was outstanding. He would get people saved 
when no one else could. It seemed to me you could 
stand up the twelve best preachers in America and let 
all of them preach and give an altar call—then he 
could take the same crowd, preach to them, and get 
more souls saved than any of the others after they'd 
had first shot at it. That was his ministry; an 
evangelistic type ministry. But he got to reading after 
some false stuff, finally accepted some false doctrine, 
and got off on it. If he has won a soul in more than 
twenty years I don't know it and no one else does 
either.
I know of some born-again, Spirit-filled people 
who were soul winners, getting people saved and filled 
with the Holy Spirit. But they got taken up with certain 
doctrines. Some of them told me, "God is doing a 
different thing nowadays." No. God's not doing a 
20

BABYHOOD
different thing nowadays. They're just off their 
rockers. He's still concerned about saving people. They 
just left the fundamental truths of the doctrine of the 
Word of God and went off on something that doesn't 
amount to a hill of beans.
Some things are actually poisonous in themselves. 
And some things it doesn't make a whole lot of 
difference how you believe on them—they are simply 
not essential to salvation and it wouldn't make any 
difference whether you believed it, or you didn't 
believe it.
But too many times Christian people will feed on 
everything in the world except the right thing, and will 
become poisoned. Then they lead disciples off after 
themselves. If the Spirit of God is in it, He is 
concerned about there being unity. Did you notice 
Ephesians 4:13 says, "Till we all come in the unity of 
the faith"? That which will divide Christians is not of 
the Spirit of God—it's of the devil. The Spirit of Love 
never divides.
I went into a Christian home once and saw some 
books I knew to be poisonous lying on a living room 
table. They were religious books, but they were 
poisonous. (We need not only be careful about secular 
books, but we need to be careful about reading 
religious books.) I purposely worked the conversation 
around to these books. I picked one up and said 
21

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
something about it.
This person was a born-again, Spirit-filled 
Christian but they said "Oh that is the most marvelous 
book."
"Is it?" I said.
"Yes."
In the early days of my Christian experience I had 
happened to get hold of some of these books and had 
detected immediately the poison in them. So I just 
turned to certain pages and began to read certain things 
aloud.
"Well now, Brother Hagin, they give chapter and 
verse in there. I looked some of them up and those 
verses are in the Bible."
I said, "Certainly. If they didn't give some verses—
though they may take them out of their setting—and a 
little Bible, folks wouldn't read it. If you were going to 
poison a dog he wouldn't eat just the poison. You have 
to put the poison on a good piece of meat."
Do you see what I'm talking about? You have to 
put the poison on a good piece of meat to get a dog to 
come. The devil will use some good scripture to get 
you to eat it, but he'll put a little poison on it. Be 
careful no matter who you read after. Don't read 
everything you can get your hands on. Unless you are 
a fully mature Christian and able to rightly divide it, it 
would be best not to read such things.
22

BABYHOOD
Years ago I held a meeting for a Full Gospel 
minister, a very well educated man, a doctor of 
divinity. Up to that time I had never seen a larger 
personal library than his. There's no telling how many 
hundreds of volumes lined the walls from ceiling to 
floor. Being a bookworm myself I was interested in 
looking it over. I read some of his books while I was 
there in three weeks of meetings.
As we talked one day he said, "Brother Hagin, I'll 
be perfectly honest with you. There are some things 
I've read that I wish I'd never read. They bother me. 
They hinder me yet, though I don't read them 
anymore..." And he mentioned some of these books. 
They were religious books. But he said, "I just wish I 
had never read them. It hinders my faith today. It 
hinders me in believing God today."
It would have been better for him never to have 
built that into his inner consciousness. But he had.
When I start reading something that takes faith out 
of me instead of putting faith in me, I have enough 
sense to lay it down right then. Be careful what you 
feed upon. There is a saying used in the area of man's 
natural diet, "You are what you eat." The same thing is 
true spiritually, "You are what you read."
Irritability
23

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
Babies are easily spoiled. And when they become 
spoiled they become irritable. It's mighty easy to spoil 
them to a light so that you have to keep a light on. It's 
mighty easy to spoil them to being handled and held. 
They are babies.
But the Bible says something about babies growing 
up. David said, "Surely I have behaved and quieted 
myself, as a child that is weaned of his mother: my 
soul is even as a weaned child" (Psalm 131:2). The 
Bible says concerning Isaac, "And the child grew, and 
was weaned: and Abraham made a great feast the same 
day that Isaac was weaned" (Genesis 21:8).
That ought to be a great day—that day when 
Christians grow enough to get off the bottle. But you 
know, it isn't. It ought to be a feast day; instead it's a 
cry day. I know, I pastored nearly twelve years. It's no 
wonder to me at all that we're not doing more in some 
of our churches than we are. If we do get a newborn 
babe in we don't have a bottle for it. Every bottle is in 
use. And the older babies are not going to give up their 
bottles. Every bed in the spiritual nursery is taken. And 
the older babies don't want to get up and give up their 
beds.
In the last church I pastored there were two ladies 
who lived next door to each other. Bless their hearts. 
They had been saved I don't know how long, baptized 
with the Holy Spirit and speaking with tongues. But 
24

BABYHOOD
that doesn't make you a full grown Christian. They 
were the biggest babies in the world. You'd have to run 
after them, and run after them, and run after them. 
They wanted you to come and pet them. They would 
miss church Sunday for you to come over on Monday 
and pet them.
So I just quit.
When one of the deacons said something to me 
about it I said, "Brother, if you want to go over and 
visit them, you go. But I'm never going over there 
again. The longest day I live, or the longest day I 
pastor this church, I will never set foot inside their 
houses again. I'm tired of wasting my time with them. 
They are babies who want to stay babies. There are 
other people who can be helped. There are new people 
to be visited. And others are getting saved who can be 
taught."
You couldn't have taught those old babies 
anything. So I quit visiting them and never set foot 
inside their houses the eighteen months I continued to 
pastor that church. But do you know what? When they 
saw I wasn't coming again I believe they were more 
faithful to church than they'd ever been.
We ought to grow enough spiritually so that instead 
of someone's having to come and visit us, and pump us 
up, and prop us up, and pray with us, and feed us, we 
are able to be out helping others ourselves. When 
25

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
weaning time comes we ought to thank God for it.
Actually, if a child is weaned properly, when 
weaning time comes it will turn its face from the 
bottle. If it isn't, you have a cry on your hands. If you 
can just keep people on the milk, they will grow. Peter 
said, "Desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may 
grow thereby."
I have actually had pastors say to me, in trying to 
tell me I was giving their congregation a little too 
much, "Now Brother Hagin, I know my congregation 
should be better than they are, but you have to be 
careful. All they can take is a little milk. All I ever 
feed them is a little milk."
I said, "No, you haven't even given them milk. 
You've been pastor here thirty years. If they had been 
getting milk they would have grown. Peter said that 
we would grow thereby."
They didn't grow; so they weren't even getting 
milk. They were just getting bluejohn. Bluejohn is 
milk with all the cream taken out.
Babies are easily frustrated, easily distracted, easily 
hurt. The Lord wants to bring us to the place where 
we're not so easily frustrated. He wants to bring us to 
the place where we're not so easily distracted. He 
wants to bring us to the place where we're not so easily 
hurt.
26
