Growing Up, Spiritually
Chapter 6: 6 WALKING IN LOVE

"...the love of God is shed abroad in our 
hearts by the Holy Ghost...."
—Romans 5:5
To fellowship with God, to walk with God, to walk 
in God's realm, we must walk in love. Divine Love. 
For God is Love.
When I was born-again, He became my Father. He 
is a Love God. I am a Love child of a Love God. I'm 
born of God, and God is Love, so I am born of Love. 
The nature of God is in me. And the nature of God is 
Love.
We can't say we don't have this Divine Love. 
Everyone in the family has it, or else they're not in the 
family. They may not be exercising it. They may be 
like the one-talent guy that wrapped his talent in a 
napkin and buried it. But the Bible says that the Love 
of God has been shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy 
72

WALKING IN LOVE
Ghost. That means the God-kind of hove has been shed 
abroad in our hearts, our spirits. This is a Love family.
Jesus said, "By this shall all men know that ye are 
my disciples—(How are they going to know it?)—if 
ye have love one to another" (John 13:35). That's the 
way they're going to know us.
This kind of Love is not selfish. "God so loved the 
world that he gave...."
The love law of the family of God is. "That ye love 
one another; as I have loved you," (John 13:34). How 
did He love us? Because we deserved it? No! He loved 
us while we were yet unlovely. He loved us while we 
were yet sinners. The Bible says so.
(And think about this. If God loved us with so great 
love when we were sinners, when we were unlovely, 
when we were His enemies, do you think He loves His 
children any less? No, a thousand times no.)
"Loves" Compared: Divine—Natural Human
This Love we're talking about is Divine Love, not 
natural human love. We hear a lot today about natural 
human love, but there is simply no love in this old 
world like the Love of God. Natural human love is 
selfish. I've heard people say, "A mother's love is akin 
to the love of God." I thought that at one time. But it 
isn't so. As a usual thing a mother's love is a natural 
73

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
human love. And as a usual thing, it's selfish. "That's 
my baby."
"Oh, I love my children, I love them," a woman 
came crying to me saying, "I want you to pray for 
them. I've brought them up right here in this church, 
and I don't understand it. Not a one of them will come 
except my girl."
One of her daughters played the piano and she was 
the only one who came. In fact, one of the boys had 
just run away from home.
She said, "There isn't anyone in this church that 
loved their children any more than I did."
I said, "Sister, there has to be a reason. I'm a 
stranger here, just an evangelist, but I can see this poor 
girl here on the piano bench. You've smothered her 
with your 'love.' And I'll guarantee the reason the rest 
of them ran off is because you wouldn't let them out 
from under your coattail. You wanted to run their lives 
entirely. (I'd look at this girl at the piano and she'd 
duck her head. She didn't know how to act.) I dare say 
your daughter has never had a boy friend in her life, or 
a girl friend either."
"Well no," she said, "I just always kept her at 
home. I thought I could raise her up better."
I said, "No, you couldn't. Her personality is 
twisted."
Natural human mother love; but it was selfish. She 
74

WALKING IN LOVE
didn't have her children's interests at heart. She had her 
interests at heart. She wanted to keep them with her.
Have you ever noticed that mothers-in-law rarely 
have trouble with sons-in-law? It's usually with 
daughters-in-law. Many times that mother just feels 
there is no girl anywhere good enough for "my boy." 
Oh yes, she may be saved, filled with the Holy Ghost, 
and talking in tongues every night, but instead of 
letting the Love of God in her heart dominate her, she 
is letting the natural human love in her flesh dominate 
her. Constantly picking. Constantly saying things.
The reason mother-in-law and daughter-in-law 
have trouble—if they don't walk in Love—is that for 
years that mother was the main one in the life of this 
boy. She wants to keep on telling him what to do. And 
now the wife wants to tell him what to do. They can't 
both tell him what to do. And he's in a dilemma.
The Love of God is in our hearts, but it may be like 
the talent that was wrapped in a napkin and hidden in 
the earth. We may not use it, but that Love of God is in 
our hearts.
If we would use it, and learn to let that love 
dominate us, it would make a difference in our lives. It 
would cure the ills in our homes. This kind of Love 
has never been to a divorce court, and will never go. It 
was natural human love that went there. Natural 
human love can turn to hatred when it doesn't get its 
75

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
way. It will fight and fuss, claw and knock, cuss and 
be mean. Divine Love, when it is reviled, revileth not 
again. I didn't say Christians haven't been to a divorce 
court; they have. But they weren't letting the Love of 
God dominate them.
God wants us to grow. And thank God, we can 
grow in Love. The Bible speaks of being made perfect, 
or mature, in Love. No, we haven't been made perfect 
in Love yet, but we can be and some of us are on our 
way.
The God-kind of Love is not interested in what I 
can get—but in what I can give. Do you see how that 
can solve all the problems in your home?
Too many are selfish. And even though they are 
Christians, they let the natural dominate them. "What 
can I get." "I'm not going to take this." "I'm not going 
to take that." "I'm not going to put up with this." "I." 
"I." "I." "I."
It's true in churches. In the second church I 
pastored I was twenty and single so I rented a room 
from a couple in the church. The man knew the Bible 
and had a marvelous experience with God. But he was 
the type that said, "I've got my say-so, and I'm going to 
have it. I'm a member of that church just as much as 
anyone else and I've got my say-so." He had his say-
so, and so did some others, until everything was 
wrecked.
76

WALKING IN LOVE
I only stayed six months. God told me to tell them 
that unless they repented the time would come when 
they wouldn't have a church. Through the first 
prophetic utterance I ever had He said, "I'll remove 
their candlestick. If they don't repent, the doors of this 
church will be closed within one year. They will 
remain closed two years, and then they will open up 
again. I'll give them one more chance. If they don't 
make it then, this church building will be moved off 
this church lot."
They got mad. They were about ready to do to me 
the same thing those folks were ready to do to Jesus in 
His hometown of Nazareth. They were ready to throw 
Him off the brow of the hill. They reported what I'd 
said to some of the elders of the movement, and they 
wanted to boot me out, but were a little afraid to.
However, at the end of the year, just as He said, the 
doors of that church closed for two years. A padlock 
was on it. Then a fellow opened it up again. And God 
gave them a certain amount of time. But they didn't 
walk in the light and it shut down. It came to pass just 
as God said. I could take you there and show you a lot 
with no church today, and it still belongs to that 
particular movement.
Through the years there were enough of them to 
have a church. But they couldn't. Because they 
couldn't get along among themselves. They never got 
77

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
above the babyhood stage of Christianity. They 
remained babies. They didn't grow.
As children of God the nature of God is in us. And 
God's nature is Love. So it is natural for us, spiritually, 
to Love. But if I let my outward man and my mind 
dominate me, that Love nature in my heart is kept 
prisoner. Let's release the Love of God that's within us.
An Expose' on Love
What about this God-kind of Love? What are its 
characteristics? They're given to us in I Corinthians 13. 
It is to be regretted that the King James translates the 
Greek word for divine love, agape, as charity. My 
favorite translation of this "Expose' on Love" is the 
Amplified. Let's look into it in the Amplified 
beginning with verse 4:
"Love endures long and is patient and kind;" A 
lot of people endure long—but they aren't 
patient and kind while they do it. They just 
suffer long because they have to. "I've 
suffered all I'm going to. I'm not going to 
have it this way any more."
"Love never is envious nor boils over with 
jealousy;"
It's natural human love that is jealous. This kind 
78

WALKING IN LOVE
of love doesn't boil over with jealousy.
"Love is not boastful or vainglorious, does not 
display itself haughtily. It is not conceited—
arrogant and inflated with pride; it is not rude 
(unmannerly), and does not act unbecomingly."
"Love (God's love in us) does not insist on its 
own rights or its own way, for it is not self-
seeking;"
I wish you would take time to let that soak in. 
"Well, I know what's mine though. I've got my 
say-so and I'm going to have it. I've got my 
rights and I'm going to have them." No matter 
how much they may hurt someone else.
This says Love doesn't insist on its own rights. 
We'll never make it until we start believing in 
God, and believing in Love. It's the best way! 
And it's your way!
"(Love) is not touchy or fretful or resentful; it 
takes no account of the evil done to it—pays no 
attention to a suffered wrong."
Here is the Love thermometer. Here is the Love 
gauge. It's very easy to find out whether or not 
you're walking in Love. When you begin to take 
account of the evil done to you, you're not 
walking in Love. As long as you walk in God 
and stay full of the Spirit, you won't take 
account of the evil done to you.
Through the years things have happened to me, 
79

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
just as they have to you. And I've had ministers, 
and even relatives tell me, "I wouldn't take that. 
I wouldn't put up with that. Not me." But I just 
kept my mouth shut and never said a word, 
smiled and stayed happy. Why? I wouldn't take 
time to deny it if they told on me I killed my 
grandma. I'd just keep shouting, "Hallelujah! 
Praise God! Glory to God!" Just go on. You'll 
come out on top in the long run.
Even ministers have told me, "There must be a 
weakness in your character. You never take up 
for yourself." No, it's a strength. Because Love 
never fails. Many have failed; and have even 
died prematurely because they lived so in the 
natural they couldn't take advantage of the 
privileges and rights of a child of God which 
belonged to them. They were always fussing 
and fighting until it had an effect on their 
bodies.
"(Love) takes no account of the evil done to it."
That has to be the God-kind of Love because 
we were enemies of God, and God didn't take 
account of the evil we had done to Him. He sent 
Jesus to redeem us. He loved us while we were 
yet sinners.
"(Love) pays no attention to a suffered wrong." 
As an old boy down in Georgia said, "You 
might as well come up to the licklog and 
80

WALKING IN LOVE
admit it's so," there aren't too many people 
walking in Love—in God's Love, in Christ's 
Love—even though they have it. They're 
walking in natural human love. And they 
sure pay attention to a suffered wrong. They 
get all puffed. A husband and wife, both 
Christians, will get mad and won't speak for 
a week because of some wrong. I know I'm 
on your toes, but I just want to stand there a 
while.
Can't you see how it would straighten things out 
for us in the home, the church, the nation, for 
men to become children of God and get the 
Love of God in them, and then live in the 
family of God as children of God?
"(Love) does not rejoice at injustice and 
unrighteousness, but rejoices when right and 
truth prevail."
"Love bears up under anything and everything 
that comes."
Someone said, "I just can't take it any longer." 
Love can. "I just can't put up with him any 
longer." Think about God. He's putting up with 
all of us. "I've taken just about all I can take." 
That's old natural human love. The Love of God 
in you bears up under everything.
"(Love) is ever ready to believe the best of 
81

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
every person."
Natural human love is ready to believe the 
worst of every person. It's ever ready to believe 
the worst about the husband, the worst about the 
wife, the worst about the children. But this 
God-kind of Love is ever ready to believe the 
best of every person; husband, wife, brother or 
sister in the church, children. Believe the best of 
every person.
I've traveled across the country in the ministry. 
It's amazing what you hear on this preacher and 
that preacher, this person and that person, this 
deacon and that deacon, this Sunday School 
teacher and that Sunday School teacher, this 
singer and that singer. I never pay the least bit 
of attention to any of them. I don't believe a 
word of it. I believe the best of everyone.
Children ought to have the right to be brought 
up in this kind of a Love atmosphere. They'll go 
out in life's fight and win then. But when you 
see the worst in your children, always telling 
them, "You'll never amount to anything. You 
won't do this and you won't do that," they'll live 
up to what you say. Though they may have 
missed it, when you see the best in them and 
love them rightly it will bring the best out of 
them. They will amount to something.
"(Love's) hopes are fadeless under all 
circumstances and it endures everything 
82

WALKING IN LOVE
(without weakening). Love never fails—never 
fades out or becomes obsolete or comes to an 
end."
If you walk in love you will not fail. Love never 
fails!
We are interested in spiritual gifts and we ought 
to be. But we ought to be interested in Love 
first. Prophecies will fail. Tongues shall cease. 
Knowledge shall vanish away. But, thank God, 
Love never fails.
Oh yes, I believe in prophecy and prophesying. 
I believe in tongues. Thank God for it. But you 
can exercise these things outside of Love and 
they become as sounding brass and tinkling 
cymbal.
The thing about it is: Let's have prophecy. Let's 
have tongues. Let's have faith. Let's have 
knowledge. But let's have Love with it. Let's put 
Love first because we are in the family of Love 
and have become acquainted with our Heavenly 
Father who is a God of Love.
We ought to want to learn. We ought to want to 
grow. We ought to want to grow in Love until 
we are made perfect in Love. I haven't been 
made perfect in love yet, have you? But did you 
know the Bible says we can? Not in the next 
world, but in this world. I believe some of us 
are going to make it. I'm not going to quit just 
because I haven't made it yet. I'm going to keep 
83

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
after it. Thank God for His Word! Thank God 
for His Love!
84
