Growing Up, Spiritually
Chapter 4: 4 MANHOOD

There are many scriptural characteristics of the 
manhood stage of spirituality. In fact, this entire book 
is aimed at seeing this spiritual man. But three of his 
characteristics we'll discuss here are:
1. Esteeming Earthly Things Lightly
2. Deadness to Censure or Praise
3. Ability to Recognize God at Work
Esteeming Earthly Things Lightly
"By faith Moses, when he was come to years, 
refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's 
daughter; Choosing rather to suffer affliction 
with the people of God, than to enjoy the 
pleasures of sin for a season; Esteeming the 
reproach of Christ greater riches than the 
treasures in Egypt: for he had respect unto the 
41

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
recompence of the reward."
—Hebrews 11:24-26
Moses, when he was come to years—that means 
when he grew up, when he became a man—refused to 
be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter.
Think about what he refused. He saw a difference 
in the people of God and the people of the world. 
(Egypt is a type of the world.) In the world he was the 
son of Pharaoh's daughter, in line for the throne. He 
had honor, wealth, prestige. He had the things the earth 
and the world had to offer. Yet he esteemed the 
reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in 
Egypt. Heir to the treasures of Egypt, but he esteemed 
the reproaches.
One characteristic of growing up is to esteem 
earthly things lightly. You cannot put earthly things 
above spiritual things and grow spiritually.
God wants to prosper His children. He's concerned 
about us. He wants us to have the good things of life. 
He said in His Word, "If ye be willing and obedient, ye 
shall eat the good of the land" (Isaiah 1:19). But He 
doesn't want us to put those things first.
Some are more interested in making the dollar than 
in serving God. Spiritual things must come first if you 
are to be spiritual. You must esteem spiritual things 
more than the dollar, more than earthly things.
No, it's not wrong to have money. It's wrong for 
42

MANHOOD
money to have you. It's wrong for money to be your 
ruler, your master.
God wants you to prosper.
III JOHN 2
2 Beloved, I wish above all things that thou 
mayest prosper and be in health, even as thy 
soul prospereth.
That's talking about financial and material 
prosperity, physical prosperity, and spiritual 
prosperity. Look at it again. "Beloved, I wish above all 
things that thou mayest prosper (material prosperity) 
and be in health (physical prosperity), even as thy soul 
(spiritual prosperity) prospereth."
The first Psalm is so beautiful—and makes it so 
clear that God wants us to prosper.
PSALM 1:1-3
1 Blessed is the man that walketh not in the 
counsel of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way 
of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful.
2 But his delight is in the law of the Lord; and 
in his law doth he meditate day and night.
3 And he shall be like a tree planted by the 
rivers of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in 
his season; his leaf also shall not wither; and 
whatsoever he doeth shall prosper.
God wants us to prosper.
43

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
Our need, however, is to evaluate things as they 
should be evaluated—to esteem earthly things lightly
—to put first things first.
We all think the preacher ought to be that way. If a 
pastor takes a better church where he makes more 
money, people think, "He just took that so he'd be 
better paid." But they wouldn't think a thing in the 
world of taking a better job, and perhaps moving off 
and leaving a good spiritual church and getting in one 
where they'd all backslide.
I was talking to a fellow a number of years ago. I 
was over in his town on business and ran into him on 
the street. This was back in depression days. He had a 
good job, making good money, but he'd been offered a 
job making $50 more a month. That doesn't sound like 
much today, but in those low depression days it was a 
lot of money. I knew lots of men with families who 
didn't even make $50 a month. He already made a 
good salary, but was offered this job in another town, 
making $50 more than he was making.
He said, "Did you know I was moving to So-and-
so?"
He was a member of a Full Gospel church and I 
happened to know that in the town where he was 
moving they didn't have a Full Gospel church.
So I said, "What kind of church do you have in that 
town?"
44

MANHOOD
He said, "What do you mean?"
I said, "Is there a Full Gospel church there?"
He said, "I don't know; I never thought about that."
I said, "No, you were just interested in the $50 
more a month. But wait a minute, I knew you before 
you came into Pentecost. I happen to know you'd spent 
all your money. Doctors thought your wife had cancer 
of the stomach. But when she got the baptism of the 
Holy Ghost, without anybody praying for her, she got 
healed and can eat anything she wants. I happen to 
know you'd spent thousands of dollars on one of your 
boys physically, but since you've come in where divine 
healing is taught, that boy has been in good health."
He said, "Yes, that's right."
I said, "I happen to know that there isn't a Full 
Gospel church in that town."
(It would have been different if he was thinking 
about going there to start one, but he wasn't capable.)
He said, "You know, I never thought of that."
I said, "No, you'd take your family out of a good 
church where the Gospel is preached, where you've 
been blessed immeasurably, physically as well as 
spiritually, for $50 more a month. I'll not tell you to go 
or not to go, but I will tell you you'd better pray about 
it."
The next time I saw him, he said, "I'm not going. I 
don't believe it's worth it."
45

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
A man and his wife came to a meeting I was 
holding in Dallas. The woman's mother, who had gone 
to be with the Lord, was a member of a church I'd 
pastored some years before. She was a wonderful 
Christian and a great blessing to my wife and me as 
young people with babies.
I knew that this lady hadn't always been a 
Christian. She used to visit her mother and her mother 
said she wasn't saved. But then she had gotten saved, 
received the Holy Spirit, and attended an independent 
Full Gospel church; a fine church. And she was going 
on for God.
So I asked, "Where do you go to church now?"
She said, "Oh, I don't go anywhere."
"What do you mean? I thought you were a member 
of..." And I mentioned a certain church.
"Oh, they don't even have a church there anymore. 
It was closed down for awhile. Then someone took it 
over. Our pastor backslid and quit preaching. We don't 
go anywhere; just here and there. While you're here 
we're coming over here."
I said, "Where do you pay your tithes?"
"Oh, we quit. We used to pay tithes, but we don't 
anymore. We used to pay tithes to our pastor, but he 
backslid."
I said, "There's no use in your backsliding just 
because he did." I don't know whether they 
46

MANHOOD
appreciated it or not, but I said, "You need to get in 
somewhere and work for God, and worship the Lord. 
A rolling stone never gathers any moss, as we say."
We need each other. We need the fellowship of one 
another.
Someone said, "Oh Brother Hagin, I can stay at 
home and be as good a Christian as anybody."
You can't do it. The Bible says, "Not forsaking the 
assembling of ourselves together, as the manner of 
some is; but exhorting one another: and so much the 
more, as ye see the day approaching" (Hebrews 
10:25).
We see that day approaching—the coming of the 
Lord. We need one another. We need to grow up. We 
need to esteem earthly things lightly. We need to put 
God first.
We don't go to church because we're in love with 
the pastor or the wife of the pastor, or the Sunday 
School teacher. We should go because we love God 
and want to worship Him.
People sometimes lose their children because they 
don't put first things first. The children grow up 
physically and get away from God, because the wrong 
example was set for them.
We were visiting my wife's folks in Sherman, 
Texas one Christmas when my daughter was only six 
years old. Christmas was on Saturday. The next day 
47

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
was Sunday. I was to preach about fifty-seven miles 
away. It was raining and disagreeable. When you'd get 
out it would seem to go right through you.
Sunday morning my mother-in-law said, "I'll keep 
Pat. Just leave her here. She has a hacking cough and it 
feels like she may have a little bit of fever."
I said, "No, we're not going to leave her. We 
prayed and believed God. And besides that when we 
came over here yesterday she had that same little 
hacking cough. Actually she's much better today. If we 
don't take her to Sunday School and church this 
morning, then we'll leave the impression on a little six 
year old that it's more important to eat Christmas 
dinner with Grandma than to go to church on Sunday 
morning. And that's not what I believe."
Do you see where people lose their children? And 
why they grow up and become unfaithful in church?
You can't just tell them. The Bible says, "Train up 
a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he 
will not depart from it" (Proverbs 22:6).
F.F. Bosworth said, "Some people wonder why 
they can't have faith for healing. They feed their body 
three hot meals a day, and their spirit one cold snack a 
week."
Determine in your heart to put spiritual things first. 
First things first. Esteem earthly things lightly, even if 
it's your own relatives. Put God before them. Put God 
48

MANHOOD
before your own self-life. You will be blessed 
spiritually, and better off physically—both you and 
your family as well.
Deadness to Censure or Praise
"But with me it is a very small thing that I 
should be judged of you, or of man's judgment: 
yea, I judge not mine own self. For I know 
nothing by myself; yet am I not hereby justified: 
but he that judgeth me is the Lord."
—I Corinthians 4:3-4
Paul had grown in grace to such an extent that he 
sought only to commend himself to God. He was not 
influenced or affected by what others thought of him. 
He did not get in bondage to anybody. It was not a 
carnal independence—but a saintly dignity.
The law of love governed him. He was not easily 
puffed up, nor was he touchy or resentful. His spirit—
where the love of God was shed abroad—dominated 
him.
Immature Christians will feel slighted or puffed up. 
If they are criticized—or even imagine that they are—
they are restless, uneasy, and full of self-pity. On the 
other hand, if they are noticed and appreciated they 
feel lifted up and full of self-importance.
Baby Christians are self-conscious. And ever-
49

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
conscious of what others are thinking about them. 
Therefore they are "tossed to and fro" childishly trying 
to be popular.
The mature believer is God-conscious. And ever-
conscious of what God's Word says about him and to 
him. Because he is able to testify with Paul, "It is a 
very small thing that I should be judged of you or 
man's judgment," he is free to walk in and voice his 
convictions.
He fits the description given in the Amplified 
translation of I Corinthians 13:5. He is not conceited—
arrogant and inflated with pride. He is not touchy or 
fretful or resentful. He takes no account of the evil 
done to him—pays no attention to a suffered wrong.
Ability to Recognize God at Work
One of the best spiritual examples of this 
characteristic is Joseph.
You remember how he saw certain things 
happening in a dream and his brothers became jealous 
of him. They were going to kill him, but finally just 
sold him into slavery. He was taken into Egypt, where 
eventually he stood and refused to bow to the wishes 
of his master's wife and was thrown into prison. He 
stayed in prison seven years.
Most people would have become bitter and said, 
50

MANHOOD
"God has forsaken me after these seven years."
He interpreted a dream for a fellow prisoner—
Pharaoh's butler—that in three days the butler would 
be lifted up and restored. Joseph asked the butler to 
make mention of him to Pharaoh when he was 
delivered. The butler was released as Joseph said, but 
he forgot Joseph. It was two years more before Joseph 
got out.
In those two years most folks would have grown 
bitter saying, "That's the way it is. You try to help 
folks and they won't help you."
But the time came when Joseph was brought out of 
prison. And eventually he was made prime minister of 
Egypt.
A famine back in his home country caused his 
father to send his brothers to Egypt in search of food. 
They had to be brought before him because he was 
prime minister.
They didn't know him. But he recognized them; the 
very ones who had sold him into slavery. He didn't tell 
them who he was but asked, "Is your father well, the 
old man of whom ye spake?" They answered that he 
was in good health.
Benjamin hadn't come with them. So Joseph said to 
them, "Hereby ye shall be proved: By the life of 
Pharaoh ye shall not go forth hence, except your 
youngest brother come hither."
51

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
They went back and told their father, "The man did 
solemnly protest unto us, saying, Ye shall not see my 
face, except your brother be with you."
Poor old Jacob didn't know that it was God. Joseph 
was gone. And now they were taking Benjamin. He 
thought all things were against him. But they weren't. 
They were all for him. He just didn't know it.
When you're hungry, you'll do about anything, so 
Benjamin went with them. When they got there, 
Joseph made a feast for them. And he announced, "I 
am Joseph."
Do you know what happened?
All those fellows hit the floor. That's what Joseph 
had seen in his dream—his brothers bowing before 
him.
Here would have been a fine opportunity for most 
people, who weren't spiritually mature and still babies, 
to have really shown off. Here would have been a 
perfect opportunity for Joseph to have stuck his 
thumbs in his galluses and said, "Well boys, look me 
over. Remember those dreams I had? They came to 
pass."
But Joseph had magnanimity of soul. He said in 
effect, "Don't worry about it, God did it." He said, "Be 
not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye sold me 
hither: for God did send me before you to preserve you 
a posterity in the earth, and to save your lives by a 
52

MANHOOD
great deliverance" (Genesis 45:5, 7).
When you can see God at work in things, you can 
rejoice whatever is going on!
53
