Growing Up, Spiritually
Chapter 9: 9 THE NATURAL MAN

"But the natural man receiveth not the things 
of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness 
unto him: neither can he know them, because 
they are spiritually discerned."
—I Corinthians 2:14
Another translation says, "because they are 
spiritually understood." If you understood the things of 
God and spiritual things with your mind, the natural 
man could understand them. But you don't. You 
discern them, or understand them, with your spirit.
The natural man is the unspiritual physical man. 
His wisdom is earthly; earthly means natural. James 
describes it:
JAMES 3:14-15
14 But if ye have bitter envying and strife in 
your hearts, glory not, and lie not against the 
truth.
15 This wisdom descendeth not from above, but 
108

THE NATURAL MAN
is earthly, sensual, devilish (demonic).
The natural man is motivated by demons. He is 
ruled by Satan. Oh no, I'm not saying he is demon 
possessed. You see, all those who have never been 
born-again have Satan as their god and father. They 
are in the kingdom of darkness and they are more or 
less ruled by Satan and demons. Remember Ephesians 
6:12 says, "rulers of the darkness of this world." So, 
the natural man is a Satan-ruled man.
ROMANS 8:7-9
7 Because the carnal mind (other translations 
call it "the mind of the flesh") is enmity against 
God: for it is not subject to the law of God, 
neither indeed can be.
8 So then they that are in the flesh cannot please 
God. (This natural man cannot please God.)
9 But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if 
so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you.
The natural man is the man that is motivated by the 
flesh; a physical man, not a spiritual man.
(I found out years ago it helped me in my studies in 
Romans, every place it says "flesh" to substitute the 
word "senses" or "physical senses." After all, the only 
way the flesh has any expression is through its 
physical senses. It will clear up a lot of thinking for 
you if you will do this.)
109

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
Knowledge Contrasted: Revelation—Natural 
Human
The natural man receives not the things of the 
Spirit of God for he cannot know them. You see, all 
the knowledge the natural man has is received through 
his five senses: sight, hearing, taste, smell, and touch. 
His mind is actually governed by his senses. I call this 
natural human knowledge. Others call it sense 
knowledge. That's a good term. The way it comes is 
through the five senses. Sense knowledge, natural 
human knowledge, is all that the natural man 
possesses.
But born-again believers have a knowledge that is 
above the flesh, above the senses. It could rightly be 
called revelation knowledge. This knowledge is 
revealed to us in the Word of God. It's above the 
natural. The Bible brings you a revelation, or reveals 
knowledge to you, which your physical senses couldn't 
grasp. You couldn't understand it even after revelation 
comes. But thank God, it's there.
It is deeply important that every believer notice the 
contrast between natural human knowledge, or sense 
knowledge, and revelation knowledge.
Many modern theologians are not revelation 
knowledge men, but sense knowledge men. It's all in 
their minds. Most of the leaders of the church world as 
110

THE NATURAL MAN
a whole are actually sense knowledge men. If they are 
saved, they are not spiritually developed. Many aren't 
even saved, but just natural men. They are governed 
by their physical senses. That leads them to repudiate 
revelation knowledge, or to give it second place in 
their lives.
The natural man cannot understand "the things of 
the Spirit of God." They are foolishness to him. The 
Bible is of the Spirit of God. It is not natural human 
knowledge. Holy men of old wrote as they were 
moved by the Spirit of God.
"Brother Hagin, this is refreshing," someone said. 
"I am going to school and my professor said 
concerning the Bible, 'If you can't understand it and 
reason it out, forget it.' "
Can you understand and reason out God? Well 
then, forget Him, according to this professor's (?) 
advice. Can you understand and reason out with your 
little peanut brain Jesus, the Son of God? The virgin 
birth? (This professor had said, "The virgin birth is not 
reasonable. It didn't happen.") Can you understand and 
reason out the Holy Spirit? Can you understand and 
reason out divine healing? Can you understand and 
reason out the supernatural? No!
"Well then," he is saying, "if it doesn't make sense, 
forget it." This just proves what I am saying. He was 
motivated by the senses.
111

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
You can always locate these people. "Now 
common sense will tell you...." I know, but where did 
you ever read in the Bible that we walk by common 
sense? You didn't. It says that we walk by faith and not 
by sight (II Corinthians 5:7). It says, "...as many as are 
led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God" 
(Romans 8:14).
Natural man cannot understand the Bible because it 
is of the Spirit of God. It is in a realm he doesn't know 
anything about. Someone said, "What you're not up 
on, you're down on." The reason a lot of folks are 
down on a lot of things is, they're not up on them. If a 
man is a natural man and hasn't been born-again, he's 
not up on spiritual things. He doesn't know anything 
about them, so he is down on them.
The Natural Walk
EPHESIANS 2:1-3
1 And you hath he quickened, who were dead in 
trespasses and sins;
2 Wherein in time past ye walked according to 
the course of this world, according to the prince 
of the power of the air, the spirit that now 
worketh in the children of disobedience:
3 Among whom also we all had our 
conversation in times past in the lusts of our 
112

THE NATURAL MAN
flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of 
the mind; and were by nature the children of 
wrath, even as others.
Here is a picture of the natural man walking. He is 
walking "according to the course of this world." He is 
walking according to the "prince of the power of the 
air." That's the devil. He is being ruled by the "spirit 
that now worketh in the children (sons) of 
disobedience." He is doing the "desires of the flesh" or 
of the senses. He is "by nature the child of wrath."
That's strong language. But it describes the man 
outside of Christ. Notice verses 11 and 12 of this same 
chapter.
EPHESIANS 2:11-12
11 Wherefore remember, that ye being in time 
past Gentiles in the flesh, who are called 
uncircumcision by that which is called the 
Circumcision in the flesh made by hands;
12 That at that time ye were without Christ, 
being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, 
and strangers from the covenants of promise, 
having no hope, and without God in the world:
The American Revised Version of verse 12 reads, 
"that ye were at that time separate from Christ, 
alienated from the commonwealth of Israel, and 
strangers from the covenants of the promise, having no 
hope and without God in the world."
113

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
That was us before we were saved. And that's a 
picture of everybody who is not now saved. The 
Gentile has no more claim or hold on God today than 
he did then. As a Gentile he has no legal standing, no 
legal rights. But thank God, he can come and be born-
again, and become a member of the body of Christ; 
then he has a standing and he has rights.
I CORINTHIANS 1:28
28 And base things of the world, and things 
which are despised, hath God chosen, yea, 
and things which are not, to bring to nought 
things that are:
Here the Word of God is talking about us when He 
chose us in Christ. He calls us the "base things of the 
world." He calls us the "things which are despised." 
And, "things which are not."
The Centinary translation reveals the "things which 
are not" represented the slaves of the Roman Empire. 
They had no standing, no voice. They were just things, 
so to speak, which were not. But when they became 
Christians, they had a standing before God.
I Peter 2:10 says, "Which in time past were not a 
people, but are now the people of God:...." The Gentile 
has no standing. He is a "no people." With all his 
boasted culture, ability, and money, he has no voice; 
no standing with God. The picture of utter spiritual 
114

THE NATURAL MAN
bondage, Ephesians 2:11 describes him as without 
hope, hopeless; and without God, Godless. Hopeless 
and Godless.
EPHESIANS 4:17-18
17 This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, 
that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles 
walk, in the vanity of their mind,
18 Having the understanding darkened, being 
alienated from the life of God through the 
ignorance that is in them, because of the 
blindness of their heart:
They walk in the vanity of sense knowledge. They 
walk in the vanity of their minds. They are darkened in 
their understanding. They are alienated from the life of 
God. They are filled with their own knowledge; 
ignorant of spiritual things.
Isn't that a picture of them?
But thank God there is a way. There's a way out. 
There's a way to God. Jesus said, "I am the way. I am 
the truth. I am the life."
115
