Growing Up, Spiritually
Chapter 10: 10 THE CARNAL MAN

"And I, brethren, could not speak unto you as 
unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto 
babes in Christ.
I have fed you with milk, and not with meat: 
for hitherto ye were not able to bear it, neither 
yet now are ye able.
For ye are yet carnal: for whereas there is 
among you envying, and strife, and divisions, 
are ye not carnal, and walk as men? "
—I Corinthians 3:1-3
Who is this carnal man? He is the babe in Christ. 
Not a newborn babe—when Paul wrote these 
Corinthians they were not newborn people. He plainly 
infers they should have been beyond where they were 
in their spiritual development. They seem to have been 
in about the same boat as the Hebrew Christians 
(Hebrews 5:12).
Paul's letter to the Corinthians is written to born-
116

THE CARNAL MAN
again, Spirit-filled believers—even to a church which 
has all the gifts of the Spirit operating in it. He said to 
them, "ye come behind in no gift," bragging on them a 
little first before he started to correct them (I 
Corinthians 1:7). He specifically mentioned that they 
didn't come behind in utterance—that means the 
utterance gifts (I Corinthians 1:5). You can see that 
when you get over to where he began to correct them. 
They were all trying to talk in tongues at once.
Here is a thought that will help us in some of our 
thinking so we can grow. Spiritual gifts don't make 
you a full grown Christian. Often folks don't know 
what spirituality is. Some think being spiritual would 
be exercising a spiritual gift. That couldn't be so 
because here it plainly states these Corinthians were 
carnal and babes—and they had all the gifts of the 
Spirit operating in their church.
I've heard people say when a fellow Christian they 
thought to be carnal gave an utterance in tongues, or 
an interpretation, or prophecy, "That couldn't be the 
Lord."
I said, "Why?"
They'd say, "Well because they're carnal."
I said, "Do you mean to infer that carnal Christians 
can't have the Holy Ghost?"
"Yes."
"That can't be so because you have Him. And the 
117

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
church at Corinth had Him."
Can carnal Christians have the Holy Ghost? 
Certainly!
"Are carnal Christians saved?" someone asked this 
question to one of our Full Gospel magazines some 
years ago. I thought it was sort of cute the way it was 
answered: "Paul seemed to think so." Then they gave 
this scripture.
Actually the Greek word translated "carnal" has 
created much comment and no little confusion among 
Bible scholars. I think only in latter years has the Spirit 
of God made this word clear to us. In some scriptures 
it is translated "carnal" and in others it is translated 
"fleshly." It really means a man who is governed by 
his physical senses. That would be the flesh governing 
him. Though he is born-again and a new creature, he 
walks after the order of natural men.
Walks as a "Mere Man"
Listen again to what Paul wrote, "And I, brethren, 
could not speak unto you as unto spiritual (men), but 
as unto carnal (men), even as unto babes in Christ...For 
ye are yet carnal: for whereas there is among you 
envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, 
(NOW GET THIS) and walk as men?" Several modern 
translations read, "and walk as mere men?"
118

THE CARNAL MAN
Paul talks about envy and some of the same things 
James did in talking about the natural man who had 
never been born-again. Paul is saying in effect, 
"Though you have been born-again, you are still 
walking as a mere man, as a common man, as the 
natural man who has never been born-again. You are 
walking just like the world men walk. There is envy 
and strife among them. You are letting your flesh 
dominate you."
One modern translation instead of saying "ye are 
carnal" says "you are body-ruled." That's a good 
translation. The outward man—the body which is not 
redeemed yet (thank God we will have a new body one 
day)—rules, instead of the inward man who is a new 
man in Christ and has the Holy Ghost dwelling in him 
dominating and ruling. Too much of the time in 
Christians the outward man dominates the inward. As 
long as he does, they will remain babies and carnal. 
They will walk just like world men—those outside of 
Christ—walk.
You'll run into these baby Christians who have 
never grown sometimes, and it is amazing to see how 
they think they are so spiritual yet they live in the flesh 
or in the senses.
I preached to a church once who before they 
received the baptism of the Holy Ghost and became 
Full Gospel were what we call old line holiness. Some 
119

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
of them almost thought it was a sin to take a bath. One 
did tell me it was a sin to use deodorant. Another one 
thought it was a sin to drink cokes.
It wasn't a little church. There were over 500 there 
the Sunday morning I preached and the Lord anointed 
me and gave me a message just for them. I never 
preached it afterwards. And although I was quite 
dignified then, much more than I am now, I jumped off 
the platform and ran up and down the aisles. I said, 
"People talk about worldliness. This is the most 
worldly church I ever preached in."
Man, they looked at me.
Then I began to tell them what worldliness and 
carnality is. I read what Paul had to say about the 
Corinthians, that there was envy and jealousy, debate, 
strife, and division. I said, "Personally, I thought Paul 
was writing a letter to this church, then I happened to 
look up there and it said Corinthians."
Some of them got so angry they were ready to 
fight. (That proved they were carnal, didn't it?) But it 
helped some of them.
Carnal Christians have not learned the love law nor 
the love walk. When you love one another you won't 
walk in envy and strife and jealousy and division. The 
Corinthians were born-again, filled with the Holy 
Ghost, they had gifts of the Spirit; yet they had not 
learned the love law, nor the love walk. When you are 
120

THE CARNAL MAN
spiritual you learn that. When we begin walking in 
divine love, Christian love, Bible love, the God-kind 
of love, we stop being jealous; we stop strife and 
division and backbiting.
Backbiting, bitterness, and jealousy are signs of 
underdevelopment on the part of the believer. What 
causes these things? It's because people are selfish. As 
long as you are selfish, sensitive, and can be hurt, you 
are a babe in Christ and cannot grow.
Growing Out of Carnality
God wants us to grow. There is no other way to get 
out of the carnal state except to grow out of it. Peter 
said, "Desire the sincere milk of the Word that you 
may grow thereby." Paul said, "I have fed you with 
milk." Paul is trying to get these Corinthians to 
growing. He didn't tell them they weren't saved. That 
comes as a shock to some folks, but they'll just have to 
be shocked.
At the end of the chapter he said to them, 
"Therefore let no man glory in men. For all things are 
yours; Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the 
world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to 
come; all are yours; And ye are Christ's; and Christ is 
God's" (I Corinthians 3:21-23).
I am so glad for the Holy Spirit and for the Word of 
121

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
God. I am so glad the Lord has been patient with all of 
us and helps us.
I can remember praying away back in 1951 at the 
beginning of March down in the state of Alabama 
where I was holding a meeting. I was praying in 
tongues, in the spirit (I Corinthians 14:14).
(The devil and natural people—and sometimes 
even some carnal people—don't like this. But it'll help 
you, praise God. Most of what I know about the Bible, 
I learned by praying in tongues. What do I mean by 
that? The Spirit is to be your Teacher. If you will take 
enough time to pray in tongues, you'll get your mind 
and body quiet while your spirit is functioning. You 
are speaking out of your spirit. Then God can 
communicate with your spirit because it becomes 
sensitive to Him, for He is a Spirit.)
I prayed in tongues for almost 3 hours that day. Yet 
it seemed like only about 15 minutes. When I looked 
at my watch I couldn't believe it had gone by so fast. I 
had my eyes shut all that time praying.
During that time of praying the Lord took me 
through the first three chapters of I Corinthians—and it 
changed me. It changed the course of my ministry. It 
changed the course of my life. It made me a greater 
blessing to the Church. It enabled me to do more than 
I'd ever done before. It helped me to do some growing.
He took me through the first chapter where Paul 
122

THE CARNAL MAN
bragged on them a little and then began to tell them 
how they were babes and carnal.
He said to me, "If it had been you and some 
preachers you know writing to those people, you 
would have said, 'You backslidden buzzards need to 
pray through and get right with God.'"
That's probably exactly what I would have said up 
until then.
He said, "But Paul didn't call them buzzards. Paul 
didn't call them backslidden. He did call them carnal, 
and he did call them babes. When a baby cries, hitting 
him over the head isn't going to make him grow. 
Feeding him. Putting something into him, not taking 
something out of him, makes him grow. Don't take 
anything out of them. Put something into them.
"Do you remember J.W.?" He asked me.
I didn't.
"Do you remember Tuffy?" He said.
That was what we called him, Tuffy. Boy, that was 
putting it mildly. Tuffy wasn't a strong enough word 
for him. But even when He said that I still didn't 
remember because it had been so many years.
Then He called his whole name to me. And when 
He gave me his last name I said, "Oh yes, I 
remember."
The Lord refreshed my memory that day and it has 
enabled me to help others.
123

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
Tuffy's mother died when he was very young. His 
daddy was a motorman on the old interurban line from 
Waco to Denison, Texas and wasn't home much. So 
Tuffy was left to himself. He ran up and down the 
back alleys and got into the wrong crowd.
He was still in the 5th grade when I was, but he 
should have been in the 8th. And he was making a 
straight "D" report card—"D" was the lowest grade 
they gave in those days. He had been in trouble and I 
overheard the principal telling my Grandpa about it.
He asked, "What are we going to do with Tuffy? 
The judge called me again and he wants to send him to 
reform school. He's just been lenient on him because 
he knew he didn't have a mother."
I heard my Grandpa say, "Mr. Mac, if you'll do as I 
tell you, we'll make a man out of him. We'll make a 
useful citizen out of him."
The principal said, "Well, the judge is leaving it up 
to me for another thirty days."
Grandpa said, "Tell him to give us ninety days."
The principal agreed to call and ask for ninety 
days.
"Did you notice how he hangs around me?" 
Grandpa asked. "He's gotten to where he stays with me 
nearly all the time."
"Yes, I've noticed that," Mr. Mac said.
"It's because I'm the only one who puts anything 
124

THE CARNAL MAN
into him. I tell him I've got confidence in him. I tell 
him I believe in him. Everybody else tells him he's no 
good. Everybody else tells him 'You're going to reform 
school.' Everybody else tells him he'll never make it. 
He's gotten where he won't even play on the 
playground anymore. He just hangs around with me. 
Now, in the first place, don't whip him anymore."
Mr. Mac would whip him one to three times a day, 
every single day. Sometimes folks do need whipping 
you understand, but other times it doesn't mean a thing 
in the world. You could hear the paddle all over that 
floor of the school, yet Tuffy would come back into 
the room laughing.
Grandpa told the principal, "I hid in the restroom in 
your office to watch and he's the one who stole the 
money out of your desk drawer."
They sold candy at lunch period and used the 
proceeds to buy playground equipment. Someone had 
stolen the money. Grandpa hid to see who got it. And 
it was Tuffy.
He said, "You have to start building confidence in 
him. So take him out of study periods and tell him, 
'J.W., I need someone older than the rest to watch the 
office. Someone has been stealing the money.' Point 
right to where the money is and show him. If a dime is 
ever missing I'll put it back myself."
After they had this conversation at noon we went 
125

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
back to class. The first study period Mr. Mac came to 
the door and called Tuffy out. Everybody snickered. 
They knew he was going to get a whipping. They kept 
listening to hear that paddle. But he didn't come back. 
They wondered. But I knew exactly what was 
happening.
Mr. Mac had said to him. "Now J.W., you keep the 
office. We need someone older over here." He pulled 
the drawer open and showed him the money. "Here it 
is and someone has been stealing it." Of course, it was 
him.
The Lord reminded me how almost immediately I 
saw him begin to make passing grades. In fact, he did 
so well they began to move him up. He never went to 
reform school. He never went to the penitentiary. He 
grew up to be a useful citizen.
That day the Lord took me through the babyhood, 
childhood, and manhood stages of spiritual growth.
He told me, "Spiritual growth is like natural growth 
in a sense. Paul didn't just take out of these people. He 
corrected them gently all right, and showed them 
where they were missing it. But he didn't take 
everything away from them. He bragged about what 
they did have. And showed them there was more out 
there—encouraging them, 'Go to it! Get after it! It's 
your's!'
"Don't beat Christians over the head," He said. 
126

THE CARNAL MAN
Don't beat anyone over the head. Feed them. Find 
somewhere you can hook on with them. Don't fight 
other churches and other believers.
"Don't take anything away from anybody," He said. 
"Give them something. Put something into them."
That day changed my ministry. I started doing what 
the Lord said, and it worked.
Let's look again at what Paul said to them in the 
last part of that third chapter, "Therefore let no man 
glory in men. For all things are yours...."
Do you mean to tell me, Paul, that these baby 
Christians, these carnal Christians who were walking 
as mere men, that all things were theirs?
Yes. It all belonged to them. They may not have 
come to a knowledge of it yet, but it belonged to them. 
They may not have grown to a place where they could 
appreciate it and take advantage of it yet, but it 
belonged to them.
"...Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the 
world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to 
come; all are yours; (He didn't take anything from 
them. He said, 'It's all yours!') And ye are Christ's; and 
Christ is God's" (I Corinthians 3:21-23).
127
