Growing Up, Spiritually
Chapter 13: 13 A WORD OF ENCOURAGEMENT

Don't become discouraged because you don't 
become a full grown Christian overnight. You didn't 
become a full grown human overnight.
The Bible says for us to examine ourselves. It 
doesn't say for me to examine you, or for you to 
examine me. But to examine yourself. As I examine 
myself, in some areas I think I'm growing pretty well, 
that I'm pretty well matured. But as I look at another 
place, it seems like I'm still a baby in that area. And 
then as I look in another area it seems like I'm in the 
childhood state. I dare say you are in the same boat.
Is anyone fully grown up? fully spiritual? already 
perfected in love? I don't think so. But, praise God, 
we're on our way!
Don't be discouraged because you don't get there 
overnight. You didn't become discouraged because 
you went one week to school and they didn't graduate 
you the next. No, you stayed on in the first grade and 
159

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
were tickled to get in the second grade the next year.
You will not grow up spiritually overnight any 
more than you grew up mentally or physically 
overnight. But there's one thing about it—there's no 
need of your not growing.
It is always the greatest concern of my life whether 
or not I know more about God and have grown any 
this year above last year.
I believe in going on to perfection. I'm not perfect 
yet, are you? But I'm going on. I'm not going to stop 
and quit just because I didn't grow up last week, or 
because I made a mistake or failed.
The full grown Christian won't do that either, 
because he knows that Jesus is right there to represent 
him at the right hand of the Father.
Every step out of love is sin. Too often we've 
gotten in our minds that you didn't sin unless you 
broke one of the ten commandments. But that was the 
law of the Old Covenant. The new law of the New 
Covenant is that we love one another. So every word 
said out of love is sin. Every act made out of love is 
sin.
But this Epistle written to the Church says, "My 
little children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin 
not. And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the 
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous" (I John 2:1).
As I look back—and I guess anyone who has had 
160

A WORD OF ENCOURAGEMENT
any spiritual growth is the same way, we thought we 
were doing pretty well spiritually, back when we were 
in some areas of babyhood. We thought we were 
living practically sinless. We met all the human 
standards they set for us, so we thought we were 
practically sinless. But then, as we grow up a little and 
develop spiritually, and we look back we see we were 
sinning more than we thought we were. We come to 
find out we missed it more than we thought we did. 
We failed to walk in love.
But just because we failed, we didn't stay there. We 
got up and went again.
It is the knowledge of God's Word that helps us to 
grow. That Word is spiritual food—food for our 
spirits!
161

With millions of Faith Library books in circulation, the printed page 
continues to be a major outreach of Kenneth Hagin Ministries. The voice of 
Kenneth Hagin Ministries is further amplified around the world through the 
following media: A 24-page free monthly magazine, The Word of Faith; an 
international radio broadcast, "Faith Seminar of the Air"; nationwide All Faiths' 
Crusades; Faith Library tapes; and RHEMA Correspondence Bible School. 
These outreaches are vital to the part Kenneth Hagin Ministries shares in 
fulfilling the Great Commission—yet, there is more . . .
RHEMA Bible Training Center is another dynamic outreach of Kenneth 
Hagin Ministries. Founded in 1974, RHEMA offers a high quality of 
ministerial studies designed to train and equip men and women to enter the 
Evangelistic, Pastoral, Teaching, Missions, Helps, Youth, and Children's 
ministries. Today thousands of graduates of RHEMA have ventured into every 
inhabited continent of the earth, carrying the Good News of the Gospel of Jesus 
Christ—with signs following.
To receive a free, full-color brochure 
on RHEMA Bible Training Center, a free 
monthly magazine, The Word of Faith, or 
to receive our Faith Library Catalog with 
a complete listing of Kenneth Hagin 
Ministries' books and tapes, write:
Kenneth Hagin Ministries
P.O. Box 50126
Tulsa, OK 74150-0126
In Canada write:
P.O. Box 335, Station D, Etobicoke (Toronto), Ontario Canada, M9A 4X3
