Growing Up, Spiritually
Chapter 3: 3 CHILDHOOD

"That we henceforth be no more children...."
—Ephesians 4:14
Paul is talking about spiritual children here. He 
wrote this letter to the church at Ephesus and we know 
they had at least twelve men in that church. Acts 19:7 
tells us about twelve men and I'm sure they had more. 
When Paul said "that we henceforth be no more 
children" he was talking about that they would be no 
longer spiritual children but would grow up spiritually.
Characteristics of the childhood stage of spiritual 
development are similar to the physical.
Unsteadiness
When my son was a boy of thirteen or fourteen, I 
told him to mow the yard. The way he grabbed that 
lawn mower and lit out you'd have thought he would 
27

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
have had it mowed in thirty minutes. Back then we had 
a push mower, the yard wasn't too big, and he could 
have had it mowed in forty-five if he'd kept at it. I had 
to go to town to attend to some business. When I came 
back after about an hour and a half, there sat the 
mower in the middle of the yard. He'd made about two 
strips after I'd left. I began to look for him. I asked my 
wife where he was.
"I don't know," she said. "Didn't he go with you?"
"No," I said. And I looked to see if I could find 
some boys playing ball on the corner. I knew if they 
were, that's where he would be. They were. And he 
was.
He was unsteady. You couldn't depend on him. As 
has been said many times, you can't put a grown head 
on a child. You can't. The same thing is true 
spiritually.
A mother tells her young daughter, "I want you to 
do the dishes and sweep the kitchen. I'm going next 
door for a little bit." The daughter starts out all right, 
but when the mother returns the dishes are unwashed 
or half done and she can't find Mary anywhere. She 
goes outside and begins to call her. After a while she 
goes to the neighbors on the other side and Mary is 
there playing dolls with Susie.
Children in the natural are unsteady 
...unreliable...impressionable...spasmodic. Spiritual 
28

CHILDHOOD
children are the same way.
When a new pastor comes to a church everyone 
comes. I've gone to pastor a church and people would 
gather around, pat me on the back, shake my hand, and 
say, "Brother Hagin, I want you to know I'm with you. 
I'm with you one hundred percent. I'm behind you." 
Six months went by and I didn't see them. Nine 
months went by and I didn't see them. I thought, "Well 
now they're behind me; they said they were." The 
trouble was they were so far behind me I never could 
reach them. They were too far behind to do any good.
Then as an evangelist I went from church to church 
holding meetings for several years. The first service or 
two some people would get right in and shake my 
hand and hug my neck and tell me, "Bless God, I'm 
with you. I believe this is it. We're going to have a 
meeting." Then we'd run two or three weeks without 
seeing them again. The last Sunday night when the 
pastor would announce we were closing I've had them 
run up to me, look at the pastor like he didn't know 
what was going on and say, "He's not going to close 
this meeting, is he?" As far as they were concerned it 
had been closed all the time.
Curiosity
Children are full of curiosity. Just as sure as you'd 
29

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
come in with a sack and set it down on the kitchen 
table, our second granddaughter, about eight at the 
time, would be in that sack. She was full of curiosity. 
She wanted to know what was in there.
Some of these spiritual children that have never 
really grown up spiritually—though they've had time 
and opportunity—as sure as they can catch a little bit 
of gossip going want to know, "Who? Who?" They're 
full of curiosity.
Curiosity is the characteristic of a child. If you tell 
a child not to look in a closet, he is going to get in it as 
sure as the world. Curious. Spiritual children are the 
same way. They're always poking their noses in the 
other fellow's business. The Word of God teaches us to 
tend to our own business. God doesn't want you 
poking your nose into the other fellow's business. 
Learn to be quiet and tend to your own business.
I was pastoring a church when one fellow wanted 
to know what all I was doing with my money. I said, 
"What are you doing with yours?"
He said, "That isn't any of your business."
I said, "I don't consider it any of your business 
what I'm doing with mine."
He got the point. You know, it is no more the 
church member's business what the pastor is doing 
with his money than it is the pastor's business what the 
church member is doing with his.
30

CHILDHOOD
Curiosity is a characteristic of a child.
Talkativeness
Children have never learned the value of silence. 
They are talkative. And you will find folks in the 
childhood stage of spiritual growth are nearly always 
talking.
Did you know the Word of God has something to 
say along this line? It tells us, "In the multitude of 
words there wanteth not sin...." (Proverbs 10:19). And, 
"...a fool's voice is known by multitude of words" 
(Ecclesiastes 5:3). We need to learn to be quiet. A 
child doesn't know any better so he's always blabbing.
I remember one time when my boy was three years 
old. We had gotten into bed late one Sunday night 
after church. I had preached twice and was tired. We 
all slept in one large room. He was in a bed across the 
room from us. The baby was in the crib. The lights out 
and it was dark.
"Daddy," he said.
I hadn't gone to sleep but I thought if I pretended to 
be asleep he would hush and go to sleep.
"Daddy."
I didn't say anything.
"Daddy."
I didn't say anything.
31

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
"Daddy."
I didn't say anything, and he just kept getting a 
little louder.
"Daddy."
Finally my wife nudged me and said quietly, "Why 
don't you answer that child?"
I whispered back, "Knowing him he'll get started 
talking." He was three years old and didn't know 
anything about the value of silence. He'd get started 
talking and you couldn't get him to shut up. I thought 
if I didn't answer him he would think I was asleep and 
shut up. But he just kept getting louder.
"Daddy. Daddy. Daddy."
Finally I said, "What is it, son?"
"What's tomorrow?"
I said, "Oh, be quiet and go to sleep. It's time to go 
to sleep."
"Well, what's tomorrow?"
"It's Monday. Now go to sleep."
"What's the next day?"
"It's Tuesday."
"Is tomorrow always Monday?"
"No, tomorrow is not always Monday. When 
tomorrow gets here then tomorrow will be Tuesday"
"I thought you said it was Monday."
"Well, it was Monday, but when Monday gets here 
then tomorrow will be Tuesday."
32

CHILDHOOD
"If tomorrow is Monday, how can it be Tuesday?"
"Well, that's just the way it is."
"What's the next day?"
"It's Wednesday."
"Will it ever be tomorrow?"
"Yes. Now hush and get to sleep."
"What's the next day?"
"Thursday."
"What's the next day?"
"Friday."
"What's the next day?"
"Saturday."
"What's the next day?"
"Sunday. That's today."
"Is Sunday always today?"
"No, it's just today today. When Monday gets here, 
it will be today."
"I thought you said it was tomorrow."
"Oh, now you have me confused. I want you to be 
quiet, and if you don't be quiet I'm going to get up and 
give you a whipping."
Like natural children, spiritual children have never 
learned the value of silence. We need to be careful 
about what we say.
There was a fellow called Father Nash who used to 
go along ahead of Charles Finney and get a few folks 
together to pray for the revival. Someone once asked 
33

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
Finney, "Do you know a little preacher by the name of 
Father Nash?"
Finney said, "Yes sir. He goes along ahead of time 
and prays for the revival. I don't have him hired. He 
just took it upon himself to do it."
"What kind of a fellow is he?" this person asked.
"Well," Finney said, "he's just like any other fellow 
who prays—he is a fellow of few words."
Folks who are talking all the time are usually guilty 
of at least three sins. They are often guilty of evil 
speaking—talking about and discussing the faults and 
failures of people not present. They are often guilty of 
vain speaking—always talking about themselves: what 
I've done; what I'm going to do; where I've been. And 
they are often guilty of foolish speaking—jesting, 
joking, and things that are unprofitable.
1. Evil speaking—talking about and discussing the 
faults and failures of people not present.
(We'll soon get through with this negative side of 
growing up and get on to the positive side. But this 
side needs to be dealt with, too.)
I was holding a meeting in Oklahoma when my son 
was about twelve. He had a four-day weekend holiday 
so I drove down to Texas and brought him back to 
spend a few days with me. I was gone all the time and 
didn't get to be with him much. We stayed in the 
parsonage with the pastor and his wife.
34

CHILDHOOD
One day at the table, the pastor got to talking about 
some of the church members, airing some of their 
faults and failures. I noticed my boy just kept looking 
at him.
Finally I said to him, right at his own table, 
"Brother, I wish you wouldn't talk that way in front of 
my boy."
He looked at me rather startled.
I said, "I would rather you'd curse in front of him. 
That wouldn't register on him. He wouldn't pay any 
attention to that. But for the twelve years I pastored, he 
always thought every member we ever had was an 
angel."
They weren't—any more than all his members 
were. But Ken thought all of them were sprouting 
wings—he didn't know that was just their shoulder 
blades sticking out. He never heard his parents say one 
word about any deacon, Sunday School teacher, 
superintendent, or church member.
You need to be careful what you say around 
children, and other people as well.
I remember one dear soul. Bless her heart. Every 
time we took prayer requests she would say, "Pray for 
So-and-so," and she'd call her husband's name. He 
came with her every once in a while and even if he 
was there she'd never stop to think about it; but would 
get up and call his name."
35

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
He rather liked me and I'd go visit him. We'd talk 
about the Bible. To tell you the real truth about it, he 
knew more about the Bible than she did. And in 
talking to him, I learned some things. I learned where 
she was missing it. I tried to talk to her about it, but it 
didn't help.
So one Wednesday night when there wasn't anyone 
there but us; when she said, "Pray for So-and-so," I 
said, "Sister, we're not going to do it."
I answered her right back from the pulpit and said, 
"We're not going to do it. Don't turn in another prayer 
request for him. We've prayed and prayed, but you 
undo all our prayers. You run home from church every 
single time some woman in the church looks a little 
hatefully at you—you think—and you tell your 
husband what an awful person she is. And if the 
preacher doesn't just preach to suit you, you run home 
and tell him what an awful person the preacher is. I 
know. I've talked to him. He couldn't have known it 
unless you told him. He knows more about what's 
going on down at this church than anyone in the 
church. You run home and tell him everything that is
—and a lot of things that ain't. You rehash everybody's 
faults, failures, and shortcomings. And as long as 
you're going to do that, you're going to undermine the 
effects of our prayers."
I learned to appreciate that dear soul. She had 
36

CHILDHOOD
enough sense to listen and she straightened up. She 
became a splendid Christian. And he got saved. I dealt 
what seemed like severely with her, but she took it. 
She wasn't an ignoramus. People who do have a little 
something upstairs are able to know when you are 
telling them the truth. Some folks would never know 
and you just have to help them the best you can.
2. Vain speaking—always talking about 
themselves.
Sometimes I almost get sickened when I go to 
church. All the singing is about what I did, what I felt, 
and what happened. We scarcely worship the Lord. It's 
no wonder to me that God doesn't move any more than 
He does in our midst. The Bible said in the 13th 
chapter of Acts concerning this group down at 
Antioch, "As they ministered to the Lord, and fasted, 
the Holy Ghost said,...." (verse 2). They weren't 
ministering to one another.
If we can be humble enough and yielded enough 
God can use us. I just don't like the idea of leaving the 
impression we are something big and something great. 
It's all right to talk about how God uses people and 
rejoice about what God is doing. But I've been in some 
meetings where those in charge bragged on each other 
from the natural standpoint until it was simply 
nauseating.
37

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
Thank God for His blessings. And let's be careful 
that we are not taken up with vain talking.
3. Foolish speaking.
It's all right to be friendly. And it's all right to tell 
something funny sometimes—but it is possible to 
spend too much of your time doing that. The Bible 
even says something about jesting and joking that are 
not convenient. It doesn't say they are a sin 
necessarily, but it says they are not convenient.
EPHESIANS 5:4
4 Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor 
jesting, which are not convenient: but rather 
giving of thanks.
I was holding a meeting one time for a fellow, a 
fine fellow. I think a lot of him. He's changed 
considerably. But I never saw a fellow as full of jokes 
as he was then. We had two services a day, and every 
time I saw him he'd tell me a new joke. I don't see how 
in the world he could remember them. He'd tell me at 
least three a day which were brand new. Morning 
service, evening service, and when we'd go out for a 
bite to eat after church he'd have another one for me; 
sometimes several.
I usually quote my scripture as I preach and once 
when we were out eating he said, "I wish I could 
38

CHILDHOOD
remember scriptures like you do."
I said, "You could if you'd spend as much time on 
them as you do on jokes. How do you remember 
jokes? I can't remember them. I go to tell some of 
them and get them all messed up."
The thing about it was I wasn't interested in them.
Now don't go off and say I said it was wrong to tell 
something funny. I didn't say that at all. I said it is 
wrong to put that first and just blab, blab, blab, blab, 
and leave God out. I'm talking about things that will 
hinder our spiritual growth. We are never going to 
grow spiritually and just feed and talk on those kinds 
of things.
I'm a preacher and I fellowship with preachers 
more than anyone else. It's a strange thing, but 
sometimes in trying to fellowship with preachers you 
can't find too many you can really talk to about 
spiritual things. I've held meetings in church after 
church—Full Gospel churches—and preacher after 
preacher wants only to talk about fishing and hunting, 
or about how many cattle they have down on their 
ranch, or how many houses they have, or how much 
property they have. I think it's all right to go fishing. 
It's all right to go hunting. It's all right to have 
property. I'm glad they do. But if you'd try to mention 
the things of God and get in the least bit deep, they'd 
look at you like you were a nut.
39

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
I'm glad it's not that way with some folks. But it is 
that way with too many. And we cannot grow 
spiritually and spend all our time talking about natural 
things.
40
