Growing Up, Spiritually
Chapter 11: 11 THE SPIRITUAL MAN

"And I, brethren, could not speak unto you as 
unto spiritual...."
—I Corinthians 3:1
In other words Paul said, "I couldn't speak unto you 
as unto spiritual men." Isn't that a sad tragedy?
Who is this spiritual man? What are his 
characteristics?
EPHESIANS 1:3
3 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all 
spiritual blessings in heavenly places in 
Christ:
The spiritual man is one who knows what belongs 
to him in Christ Jesus, and takes advantage of it.
The spiritual man has drunk deeply at the fountain. 
He has fed regularly at the table of the Lord.
The spiritual man has saturated himself in love, the 
128

THE SPIRITUAL MAN
love of God.
Knowing the Father
This man has come to know the Father in reality.
There was a time in my life that I knew the Lord 
Jesus, was filled with the Holy Ghost, had preached a 
number of years, and had various gifts of the Spirit 
operating at times in my life—but somehow, on the 
inside of me, I knew that God could become more real 
to me as my Father than a father in the flesh. The 
Word said He was my Father. And I knew in my spirit 
He could become more real to me than my wife, more 
real to me than either of my children. I knew in my 
heart—and I said it out loud as I drove down the 
highway on the way to revival meetings—that I knew 
God could become more real to me than the 
automobile I drove. But—I knew He wasn't that real to 
me.
It did not come overnight. It did not come in one 
month. It did not come in one year. But as I continued 
to do what the Bible said—to fellowship with the 
Father through the Word and through prayer—little by 
little, He became more and more real to me.
Until one day I was able to say, "He is more real to 
me and I know Him better than I know my wife. I'm 
more personally acquainted with God my Father than I 
129

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
am my wife. He is more real to me than my children. 
He is more real to me than the automobile I drive." (To 
be honest about it, not too many can say that, because 
natural things are more real to them than spiritual 
things.) I came to the place that every waking moment, 
even when I'd wake up in the nighttime, I'd be 
conscious of His presence—more conscious of His 
presence than I was of my wife's.
Knowing the Son
The spiritual man comes to know the Lord Jesus 
Christ in His great ministry at the right hand of God 
the Father. Every born-again believer knows the Lord 
Jesus Christ as Savior. But just being born-again will 
not cause you to grow. Just to know Him as Savior, 
you'll never be more than a baby. To grow, the 
believer must come to know what he is in Christ, and 
what Christ is in him. He must come to know the 
present day ministry of the Lord Jesus Christ at the 
right hand of the Father.
Knowing the reality of Jesus' present day ministry 
did more for me in my spiritual growth than anything 
else. We need to grow up in knowing the reality of His 
ministry today as High Priest (Hebrews 4:14-16), as 
Advocate (I John 2:1), as Intercessor (Romans 8:34, 
Hebrews 7:25), as Shepherd (Psalm 23:1, John 10:14), 
130

THE SPIRITUAL MAN
as Lord!
Just because we've heard this taught is no sign we 
walk in the reality of it. It is as we feed upon it and 
become acquainted with the truth that we come into 
the full knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect 
(mature) man.
Knowing the Holy Ghost
The spiritual man has come to know the blessed 
intimacy of the Holy Spirit as He is unveiled in the 
Word. You can be baptized with the Holy Ghost and 
speak in other tongues and never know this.
That's the sad thing about it. The baptism of the 
Holy Ghost has been preached in a way that isn't 
exactly right. And folks think that because "I have the 
baptism of the Holy Ghost" that's the end. But it isn't. 
It's just the beginning. And because of wrong thinking 
they never really learn to know the Holy Spirit 
intimately and are cut off from growing.
As spiritual babes they received the infilling of the 
Holy Spirit and spoke with other tongues, and were all 
"taken up" with the outward manifestation. Certainly I 
believe in speaking in other tongues. Thank God for it. 
But you hear them talking about how "I felt," and 
they're trying to "feel" that way again.
(It doesn't make the least bit of difference to me if I 
131

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
ever "feel" that way again. I base nothing on feelings. I 
base everything on the Word.)
Then when they lose that "feeling" they thought 
they had, they think He's gone. But He isn't. Jesus said, 
"I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another 
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever;" (John 
14:16). He didn't say He would stay two weeks. He 
didn't say He would come on a vacation. He said the 
Holy Ghost would come "that he may abide with you 
forever."
Somebody said, "But Brother Hagin, don't you 
believe that if a man sins the Holy Ghost leaves him?"
Certainly not. If He ever left him he would be 
forever doomed and damned. He could never get back 
to God. The Holy Ghost doesn't go and come. Not a 
scripture in the Bible says so. David, after he'd had the 
woman's husband killed and committed adultery with 
her, in his prayer of repentance said, "Take not thy 
holy spirit from me" (Psalm 51:11). Had the Holy 
Spirit left him, he could never get repentance. He 
could never pray. He could never come back.
And if He ever left you, that would be the end of it, 
too. He's still there to show you the way back to 
repentance. If you've sinned and failed He is still there
—because He's a representative of God—to show you 
the way out and lead you back.
I've found that when I've missed God and sinned it 
132

THE SPIRITUAL MAN
isn't the Holy Ghost inside me who condemns me, it's 
my own spirit. Jesus said that He hadn't come into the 
world to condemn the world, but that the world 
through Him might be saved (John 3:17).
I found that the Holy Ghost was there to take the 
Word of God and open it up to me, to show me the 
ministry of Jesus for me today. Gently. Even when I'd 
missed it and was so ashamed of it I hated it with 
every fiber of my being, yet He was so sweet and so 
gentle to lead me, to show me the way out and the way 
back.
...as Indweller
I JOHN 4:4
4 Ye are of God, little children, and have 
overcome them: because greater is he that is 
in you, than he that is in the world.
We need to become conscious of the Holy Spirit's 
indwelling presence, and learn to walk in the light of 
the Word on this subject. Then in time of crisis we 
would remain calm and collected because we'd know 
the Bible is so whether or not it "seems like" it is.
If you know "greater is he that is in me, than he 
that is in the world," when crisis comes, you won't 
have to run around like a chicken with his head cut off, 
flopping here and there trying to find help. You'll 
133

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
know Help is available. You'll know He is in there; the 
Greater One is in there. You're walking in intimate 
fellowship with Him, and He'll show you what to do.
In every crisis of life He shows me exactly what to 
do. On the inside of me, He'll rise up in me to give 
illumination to my mind, direction to my spirit. But He 
cannot do it if you're not sufficiently acquainted with 
Him to recognize it.
If you've been born-again and filled with the Holy 
Ghost, you have on the inside of you all you'll ever 
need to put you over. Jesus said, "I will pray the 
Father, and he shall give you another Comforter" (John 
14:16). The Greek word translated Comforter also 
means—and the Amplified translation reads this way
—Counselor, Helper, Intercessor, Advocate, 
Strengthener, and Standby. What else would you ever 
need?
Get acquainted with the Holy Ghost through the 
Word. When you know what the Word says about 
Him, then you'll know what He'll do. You'll know how 
He will manifest Himself, and you'll know how to 
yield to Him. You'll know how to walk with Him. And 
you can grow spiritually.
...as Teacher
Here is an invitation, a precious invitation, a 
blessed invitation of the Spirit to go into the deep 
134

THE SPIRITUAL MAN
things of God:
I CORINTHIANS 2:12
12 Now we have received, not the spirit of the 
world, but the spirit which is of God; that we 
might know the things that are freely given to 
us of God.
We didn't receive the spirit of the world—we 
received the Holy Spirit, the Spirit which is of God. 
Why? For what purpose? That we might know 
something.
Jesus said of Him, "He will teach you. He will 
guide you into all truth. He will show you things to 
come. He will receive of mine and show it unto you."
The "things that are freely given to us" are the 
things Paul's talking about in Ephesians 1:3, "all 
spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ." And 
they are the things:
I CORINTHIANS 2:13
13 Which things also we speak, not in the 
words which man's wisdom teacheth, but which 
the Holy Ghost teacheth; comparing spiritual 
things with spiritual.
Now notice something Paul said earlier in this 
chapter, "Howbeit we speak wisdom among them that 
are perfect (mature—baby Christians wouldn't get it): 
yet not the wisdom of this world, nor of the princes of 
135

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
this world, that come to nought:" (verse 13). Another 
translation reads, "nor of the dethroned powers of this 
world." That's involved in the all things He has done 
for us.
Jesus—in His death, burial, and resurrection—
dethroned the devil and all the spiritual forces that had 
ruled this earth from the time Adam sold out to him in 
the garden. Adam was the god of this world. God gave 
him dominion over all the work of His hand. But 
Adam committed high treason and sold out to the 
devil. Then the devil became the god of this world (II 
Corinthians 4:4).
Ephesians 6:12 says, “For we wrestle not against 
flesh and blood, but against principalities, against 
powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this 
world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.”
Jesus dethroned them! In His great plan of 
redemption which God planned and sent Jesus to 
consummate, these powers are dethroned. They can't 
rule over us any more, but we can rule over them in 
the name of Jesus.
Now—this wisdom is "not in the words which 
man's wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost 
teacheth;" (I Corinthians 2:13). It is an unveiling of 
spiritual things. You couldn't have knowledge from the 
natural, to save your life, that Jesus defeated the devil. 
You couldn't see Him do it. The disciples saw Him 
136

THE SPIRITUAL MAN
dying at Calvary, but they didn't know why He died. 
He was with them and had tried to tell them. But they 
didn't know why He died when He died. After He 
appeared to them they said, "Lord wilt thou at this time 
restore again the kingdom to Israel?" It wasn't until the 
Holy Ghost came and began to teach them, that they 
understood the plan of salvation and what God did for 
them in redemption. This couldn't be seen with the 
natural eye. The natural man couldn't understand it at 
all. It is an unveiling of spiritual things by the aid and 
the energy of the Spirit of God Himself.
His Inheritance
The spiritual man knows his inheritance.
COLOSSIANS 1:12-14
12 Giving thanks unto the Father, which hath 
made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance 
of the saints in light:
13 Who hath delivered us from the power of 
darkness, and hath translated us into the 
kingdom of his dear Son:
14 In whom we have redemption through his 
blood, even the forgiveness of sins:
Another translation reads, "Giving thanks unto the 
Father, who has given us the ability...." If He "made us 
meet," He gave us the ability. To do what? To enjoy 
our share of the inheritance of the saints in light!
137

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
The spiritual man will know what his inheritance is 
in the light—for the light of God's Word will shine in 
and open it to him. He'll know he has the Ability to 
enjoy it.
His Ability
For God has given us our Ability. He is our 
Ability. That Ability reveals itself in unveiling the 
treasures of the grace of God that belong to us.
Our thinking has been so shallow in some areas we 
have been robbed of God's blessings. For instance, we 
have quoted Acts 1:8, "But ye shall receive power, 
after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you: and ye 
shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in 
all Judaea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part 
of the earth," and without studying it any we've put 
emphasis on the word "power" not realizing what the 
word "power" means here.
I was pastor of a community church when I 
received the baptism of the Holy Ghost and spoke with 
other tongues. To hear Full Gospel people talk about 
this "power" I thought it would be some kind of a great 
overwhelming physical and emotional experience. But 
all I did was talk in tongues. (Yet when I read down 
through the Acts of the Apostles that was all I could 
find they did. So if the other would have been 
important, the Bible would have said something about 
138

THE SPIRITUAL MAN
it.) And though I talked in tongues for an hour and a 
half and sang three songs in tongues—as I talked in 
tongues I said in my mind, "My, my, my, I've had a 
greater blessing than this many times just out praying 
by myself."
But, you see, receiving the Holy Ghost isn't getting 
a blessing. You can get blessings beforehand and you 
can get blessings afterwards. It is receiving a Divine 
Personality to come into you and dwell in your spirit!
I didn't know that. I'd shake myself, and feel 
myself, and think, "My, my, my, I don't have any more 
power now than I ever had."
So I went back to my church and never said a word 
about it. I didn't seem to have any more power to 
preach, but the congregation began to tell it.
They said, "You have something you didn't have."
I said, "What is it?"
"Well, it's a greater ability than you had. It's a 
greater punch."
I looked up this word "power" from Acts 1:8 in 
Young's Concordance. And I found out that this Greek 
word translated "power" here also means "ability."
My congregation could see I had more ability to 
preach than I did have. I had my mind hung up on the 
"power." God said that we would receive an ability. 
An ability to witness. We've overlooked the ability 
trying to find the power.
139

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
John called it an unction, he called it an anointing, 
he said it is in you. When you know the Ability of God 
is in there then you know what he meant when he said, 
"Greater is he that is in you."
When you know this, then when you hit that hard 
place, you can just lean back on Him instead of 
fighting and trying to pray the power down or work it 
up. You can just lean back and laugh. You can shout 
all the way through because you know the Greater One 
is in there. He'll put you over. He'll make you a 
success. He'll bring you out.
The spiritual man is going to come to know this, 
but the baby doesn't know this. The baby knows he has 
had an experience.
God has made us meet, He has given us the Ability. 
That ability comes with the infilling of the Holy 
Ghost. Yes, the ability to witness. But it doesn't stop 
there. He has given us the ability to enjoy our 
inheritance.
Deliverance, redemption, is our inheritance 
(Colossians 1:13-14). We have been delivered out of 
Satan's authority. Satan has no authority over you, or 
over me, or over the Church. Let's don't let him take 
any. We have been delivered out of his power or 
authority and translated into the kingdom of His dear 
Son (verse 13).
140

THE SPIRITUAL MAN
Governed by the Word
You're in the place of His protection and His care. 
You're in the place where you feed upon the bread of 
heaven. The Word of God is the bread. Jesus said, 
"Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word 
that proceedeth out of the mouth of God." The manna 
of heaven is the Word of God. As you feed on this 
Word, you will grow up spiritually into the image and 
unto the stature of the Son of God.
And that's the only way you'll ever get there. As 
important as prayer is, you won't get there by praying. 
Though fasting may have a place, you won't get there 
by fasting. Though self-denial may have a place in the 
Christian life, you won't get there by self-denial. 
Though experience has a place in the Christian life—
and thank God for experiences—but though you may 
have had many wonderful experiences or many 
wonderful visions or revelations, they will not get you 
there. Nor will spiritual gifts get you there. These 
things have their place and their purpose, but the Bible 
tells you exactly how to get there. It comes by the 
knowledge of the Word.
The spiritual man is the one in whom the Word has 
gained the ascendancy over his mind and over his 
body. It has brought him into harmony with the will of 
God, for the Word of God is the will of God.
141
