Growing Up, Spiritually
Chapter 12: 12 THE RIGHT DIET

You have to have the right diet if you're going to 
grow.
What is it?
Well, of course, the entire Word of God. But 
particularly the New Testament. Because we live 
under the New Covenant, not under the Old Covenant. 
Some things said back there don't apply to us. Many 
principles do, but other things don't. They apply to the 
Jews.
Certain sections of the New Testament are written 
especially for your benefit. (Other sections, like the 
four Gospels, are for the benefit of not just Christians 
and believers, but the world and sinners.) There are 
142

THE RIGHT DIET
Letters which are written directly to the Church. Spend 
most of your time feeding on the Epistles.
No one told me to do it, but I believe that on the 
bed of affliction where I was born-again as a boy of 
15, I unconsciously yielded and was led by the Spirit 
of God. The first time I was physically able to have a 
Bible brought to my bed, when I looked at it and saw it 
said "Old Testament" and "New Testament" I reasoned 
that the New must take the place of the Old. So I 
started in with Matthew.
I eventually saw that the Letters were written to the 
Church—from Paul's writings to the Romans and the 
Corinthians right on down through the Letters of Peter 
and John. Through these many years I've spent 90% of 
my study of the Word of God here. It's the diet I'm 
supposed to have. It's the message that was written to 
me. There are things there which can't be found any 
place else. Paul plainly stated about the mystery of this 
revelation that it was "now" made manifest (Romans 
16:25-26).
Let your diet be mainly made up of the Epistles or 
Letters which were written to the Church. Particularly 
let it consist of I Corinthians 13 and the First Epistle of 
John.
Get an Amplified translation of I Corinthians 13 
and go over it carefully. It will do just what its name 
implies—it will amplify those verses and help you 
143

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
understand them even better.
Feed on all five chapters of I John.
You will find that in these two writings—I 
Corinthians 13 and I John—the great love teachings 
are unveiled and revealed. John comes back to it again 
and again:
"We know that we have passed from death unto 
life, because we love the brethren" (I John 3:14).
"But whoso hath this world's good, and seeth his 
brother have need, and shutteth up his bowels of 
compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of God 
in him?" (I John 3:17).
"But whoso keepeth his word, in him verily is the 
love of God perfected:...." (I John 2:5).
"There is no fear in love; but perfect love casteth 
out fear...He that feareth is not made perfect in love" (I 
John 4:18).
These are just a few of the many such statements 
there.
God's nature is Love. As His child you have the 
Love nature in you. Yet that nature has to be fed in 
order for it to grow. Unless you feed where this is 
found it will not grow and develop in your life.
I am thoroughly convinced that if every Christian 
would get into I Corinthians 13 and I John and live 
there awhile, it would only be a little while until they'd 
be so different they'd have to pinch themselves and 
144

THE RIGHT DIET
say, "Is this me?"
It wouldn't be long until their homes would be so 
different it would be absolutely amazing. For one 
statement in I Corinthians 13 is, "(Love) seeketh not 
her own" (verse 5). The babes are always seeking their 
own—naturally and spiritually, too. The baby is 
always saying, "Mother, Johnny has my cart." Or, 
"Mary has my doll." Strife. Quarreling over their own. 
The quarrels in our homes, the divorces, give us a 
picture of the babyhood state of the modern church. 
Those who walk in love and have matured in love 
wouldn't be acting this way. This babyhood condition 
in the church can be remedied only by the study, the 
feeding upon, and the putting into practice of the Word 
of God.
Study the plan of redemption. Find out what you 
are in Christ—and what Christ is in you. Find out your 
standing before God. Find out that you are the 
righteousness of God in Christ Jesus. Find out what He 
did for you in His death, burial, resurrection, 
ascension, and seating at the right hand of the Father. 
Find out what He is doing for you right now at the 
right hand of the Father in His present day ministry 
where He ever liveth to make intercession for us. This 
knowledge will help you grow out of the babyhood 
state into a full grown man in Christ.
Here's God's commentary on the subject:
145

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
I CORINTHIANS 4:7
7 For who maketh thee to differ from another? 
and what hast thou that thou didst not 
receive? now if thou didst receive it, why 
dost thou glory, as if thou hadst not received 
it?
Whatever we have from God we received by grace.
EPHESIANS 4:7
7 But unto every one of us is given grace 
according to the measure of the gift of Christ.
Each believer—though born-again as a babe—has 
a measure, a deposit of grace that will meet every 
emergency in his life.
Every believer has the same new birth, the same 
Eternal Life, the same Love of God, the same grace, 
the same Holy Spirit (we know Him first in a measure 
in the new birth, but then there is the fullness of the 
Spirit available to us), the same Eternal Intercessor, 
Jesus Christ, the same matchless Heavenly Father.
If all this be true, then there is no reason for us to 
be weak and to remain babies when by reason of time 
we should be developed.
Let's look again at the full grown believer in 
Ephesians 4:13-14, "Till we all come in the unity of 
the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, 
unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of 
146

THE RIGHT DIET
the fullness of Christ: That we henceforth be no more 
children...."
God never planned on your remaining a baby 
spiritually any more than He planned on your 
remaining a baby physically, or mentally.
We're attracted to little babies. They're so sweet 
and wonderful. But wouldn't it be sad for a little one to 
live twenty or twenty-five years and not grow 
physically or mentally? I saw an individual like that—
thirty-eight years old and still in a bassinet. His mother 
nearing seventy would pin a diaper on him and feed 
him just as you would a small baby. How your heart 
bleeds for them. Aged parents, the other children 
grown and married, and they are left with this one.
But, you know, how sad it is for Christians. Many 
are in the same boat. If we could see spiritually, 
they've never developed. They're still babies. Forty 
years old and still a baby. Selfish. Sensitive. Easily 
hurt. Envious. Jealous.
A deacon, an older man who'd been saved and 
filled with the Holy Ghost thirty years came crying to 
the parsonage bawling like a baby, "Brother Hagin, 
you don't visit me like you do some of the others. I 
saw your car three times last week over at Brother So-
and-so's house."
I said, "Yes, and there's another verse right under 
that. I'm not coming to see you either. You get up and 
147

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
testify, 'I was saved thirty years ago last October, filled 
with the Holy Ghost for thirty years.' "A big thirty year 
old baby.
This man he'd seen me visiting had just gotten 
saved in our meeting a week or so before. Because he 
was just a newborn baby he'd stumbled around and 
missed it. God talked to me in my heart and sent me 
out there to deal with him. So I went out to help him.
I said to this deacon, "You don't need anyone 
running out there to visit you and feed you the bottle. 
You need to be out visiting others yourself."
We have churches full of babies. Take their bottles 
away and you have a cry on your hands. Try to get 
them to get up and get out of the spiritual nursery and 
give up their bed to some newborn babe and they 
wouldn't do it for anything in the world.
Another deacon, a leader, supposed to be setting an 
example in the church, got mad and wouldn't come. I 
knew something happened because his wife kept 
coming. (Some men would be in a mess if they didn't 
have good wives.) I saw him in town and he would 
hardly talk to me. He was hard and cold, puffed up like 
a toad frog.
His wife was a sweet person and I asked her, 
"What's wrong with him?"
She said, "Oh, he's mad about something. He went 
home from church and went to bed. He wouldn't even 
148

THE RIGHT DIET
talk to me for three days. I finally just asked him what 
was wrong. I thought maybe it was me. But it wasn't. 
And it's not exactly you. Somebody sat in his pew. He 
always sits right here in the second pew, the second 
seat from the end. When he got here and someone was 
sitting there, he got so mad he stood up. He wouldn't 
sit anywhere else."
A man like that isn't fit to be a deacon.
God never planned that he would remain a spiritual 
baby. He wants us to grow spiritually.
Exhortations to Growth and Spirituality
EPHESIANS 3:20
20 Now unto him that is able to do exceeding 
abundantly above all that we ask or think, 
according to the power that worketh in us.
There is no need for us to stay in a state of 
babyhood, or under development. We have the Power 
of God working in us! We have the Ability of God 
working in us! But instead of yielding to that, babies 
yield to the flesh.
PHILIPPIANS 4:13
13 I can do all things through Christ which 
strengtheneth me.
See! No place for under development!
149

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
HEBREWS 5:11
11 Of whom we have many things to say, and 
hard to be uttered, seeing ye are dull of hearing.
The Book of Hebrews isn't written to the world; it's 
written to Christians, to believers. If the believer isn't 
careful, he can become dull of hearing so that the 
Word cannot reach him. This can hold him in that 
babyhood state and carnality. Going on with the next 
verse...
HEBREWS 5:12
12 For when for the time ye ought to be 
teachers, ye have need that one teach you again 
which be the first principles of the oracles of 
God; and are become such as have need of milk, 
and not of strong meat.
This doesn't mean that everyone of them would 
have a teaching gift. It means that because they have 
known and have been fed on the Word themselves, 
they ought to be able to teach someone else. Every 
believer ought to aspire to be the teacher of at least 
one. But you can't teach if you're a babe, and still on 
milk.
HEBREWS 5:13-14
13 For every one that useth milk is unskilful in 
the word of righteousness: for he is a babe. 
But strong meat belongeth to them that are 
150

THE RIGHT DIET
of full age,....
Paul talks about the same things in Timothy.
II TIMOTHY 3:7
7 Ever learning, and never able to come to the 
knowledge of the truth.
Isn't that the picture of some today? Going to 
church Sunday after Sunday, ever learning, yet never 
arriving. If calamity comes, if sickness comes, if the 
loss of property, or the death of loved ones comes, 
they stand paralyzed and helpless in the presence of 
the enemy.
They have the resources of God because they are 
believers and He has made provision for them. They 
have the Ability of God. They have His loving Words. 
But they have never taken advantage of it. They never 
avail themselves of the riches that are theirs when the 
crises come.
Crises of life come to all of us. But it makes a big 
difference when a crisis comes whether you are in the 
carnality babyhood stage, or whether you have grown 
at least to some extent.
Children who have never developed when crisis 
comes, are unable to take advantage of what belongs to 
them. They've stayed in their infancy. My what a 
picture.
Ephesians 5:1 and 2 shows what they could be.
151

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
EPHESIANS 5:1-2
1 Be ye therefore followers of God, as dear 
children;
2 And walk in love, as Christ also hath loved 
us, and hath given himself for us an offering 
and a sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling 
savour.
I like another translation which reads, "Be ye 
therefore imitators of God, as beloved children." 
What's it talking about to follow God? to imitate God?
Remember, God is Love. In the First Epistle of 
John, which I wanted you to stay in for awhile, John 
says in effect that if you walk in love, then you walk in 
God, and God is in you and you're in God, because 
God is love.
Imitate God in love. "God so loved the world." He 
loved us while we were yet sinners. Well, imitate Him 
in that. It's easy to love those who love you. Anybody 
can do that. But we're supposed to do like God—to 
imitate Him in love—and love the unlovely, love the 
unlovable, love our enemies.
You can't do that unless you have the Love of God 
in you. And you'll not do it unless you grow in Love.
When you're sensitive and easily hurt, it doesn't 
take enemies outside the body of Christ, but just a 
believer, a brother in the Lord, to do something that 
doesn't amount to a hill of beans and you're so easily 
152

THE RIGHT DIET
hurt you're almost ready to cut his head off.
Be imitators of God walking in Love. This is our 
privilege. This is where we should and could live. We 
have this New Covenant law to govern us as a Church:
JOHN 13:34-35
34 A new commandment I give unto you, That 
ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye 
also love one another.
35 By this shall all men know that ye are my 
disciples, if ye have love one to another.
Fruit of the Human Spirit
Love is the first fruit of the human spirit when you 
are born-again. It's not the fruit of the Holy Spirit. The 
translators were entirely wrong in putting a capital "S" 
in Galatians 5:22. It refers to the human spirit.
Jesus said, "I am the vine, ye are the branches" 
(John 15:5).
Where does the fruit grow?
On the branches.
Who are the branches? The Holy Spirit?
No. We are.
This fruit of the spirit (Galatians 5:22) is fruit that 
grows in your life because of the Life of Christ within.
How are you going to know and tell that you are 
153

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
saved?
"We know that we have passed from death unto 
life, because we love the brethren" (I John 3:14).
This is the fruit of the recreated, born-again human 
spirit (Galatians 5:22-23). You can take each fruit of 
the spirit and prove by the Bible that if you're saved 
you have it. For instance, one is peace. Romans 5:1 
says, "Therefore being justified by faith, we have 
peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ."
If you are born-again, this Love is in you. You may 
not be practicing it. But it's in your inward man, your 
spirit.
If you're ever going to grow and develop out of the 
babyhood state, you will have to learn to feed this 
Love nature on the Word of God, and exercise this 
love nature in the arena of life. Then you will grow in 
Love.
You'll not do it any other way. You could sit 
around all day and pray, "God, give me love. God, 
help me love my brother. God, help me love the 
world," and it wouldn't do any more good than to 
twiddle your thumbs and say, "Twinkle, twinkle, little 
star; How I wonder what you are."
But when you recognize the Bible teaches that 
because you are born of God you are born of Love; 
that you are made a partaker of the divine nature, 
God's nature, which is Love; and you have it, a 
154

THE RIGHT DIET
measure of it at least...and then you get ready to feed 
that love nature on the Word of God, and to put it into 
practice...you will begin spiritual development and 
growth. And not until.
Love is absolutely to govern the heart life of the 
Church.
I CORINTHIANS 10:24
24 Let no man seek his own, but every man 
another's wealth (or good).
How many of us are seeking our own good? Most 
of us. When love does not rule, then the motives of life 
become distorted; conduct becomes abnormal, and the 
body rules the spirit causing the mind to be brought 
into captivity to earthly things.
Renewing the Mind
ROMANS 12:2
2 And be not conformed to this world: but be ye 
transformed by the renewing of your mind, that 
ye may prove what is that good, and acceptable, 
and perfect, will of God.
The primal need of man is to have his mind 
renewed.
"And be not conformed to this world...." (Another 
translation says, "Be not conformed to this age.") Don't 
155

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
think like this age thinks! Don't think like this 
generation thinks. Don't think like this world thinks! 
Don't be fashioned according to this world, or this age.
"...but be ye transformed by the renewing of your 
mind, that ye may prove what is that good, and 
acceptable, and perfect, will of God." This infers that 
if your mind is renewed—and it becomes renewed by 
the Word of God—then you will know what is the 
good, the acceptable (one translation says 
"permissive"), and the perfect will of God. But until 
your mind is renewed, you will stay in the state of 
babyhood.
COLOSSIANS 3:10
10 And have put on the new man, which is 
renewed in knowledge after the image of him 
that created him:
It is deeply important that the believer's mind be 
renewed after the image of Jesus. That's one reason He 
sent the Holy Ghost to indwell us and be our Teacher 
and Guide. He said, "Howbeit when he, the Spirit of 
truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth:..." (This 
can only come as the Spirit, through the Word, guides 
us into the reality of our redemption in Christ.) "...for 
he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall 
hear, that shall he speak: and he will shew you things 
to come" (John 16:13).
156

THE RIGHT DIET
EPHESIANS 4:23-24
23 And be renewed in the spirit of your mind;
24 And that ye put on the new man, which after 
God is created in righteousness and true 
holiness.
You know as well as I, that if you put on the new 
man created after God in righteousness and true 
holiness, that is going to be the end of envyings, 
jealousies, strifes, and divisions, isn't it? Therefore, 
you wouldn't be a babe in that carnal state anymore.
ROMANS 12:1-2
1 I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the 
mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a 
living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, 
which is your reasonable service.
2 And be not conformed to this world: but be ye 
transformed by the renewing of your mind....
Paul didn't write this to unsaved people. It came as 
a real shock to me, after fifteen years in the ministry, 
when I realized that Paul is saying to people who are 
born-again and filled with the Holy Ghost that it hadn't 
affected their bodies or their minds.
Therefore the new birth and the baptism of the 
Holy Spirit are not mental experiences, nor physical 
experiences, but spiritual experiences.
After you are born again, and after you are filled 
with the Holy Ghost, it is up to you to do something 
157

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
with your body. It is up to you to do something with 
your mind.
The real you is the man on the inside—the spirit 
man. You are to present your body to God. (He does 
want transfigured bodies.) And you are to get your 
mind renewed. How? With the Word of God. By 
meditating on and practicing the Word of God.
158
