Growing Up, Spiritually
Chapter 7: 7 RECEIVING THE KNOWLEDGE

''Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and 
of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a 
perfect man..."
—Ephesians 4:13
How is that going to come about?
I guess we all want to be mature spiritually, but just 
wanting to be doesn't make it so. How are we to grow 
spiritually?
We've already pointed out I Peter 2:2, "As newborn 
babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may 
grow thereby." God starts us in the spiritual, just like 
folks get started in the natural. When babies are born 
85

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
they start off on milk. They certainly couldn't eat meat. 
And God says that this sincere milk of the Word will 
cause us to grow.
Yet there are some things Paul wrote to the 
Corinthian Christians and to the Hebrew Christians 
which are of interest to us.
I CORINTHIANS 3:1-2
1 And I, brethren, could not speak unto you as 
unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto 
babes in Christ.
2 I have fed you with milk, and not with meat: 
for hitherto ye were not able to bear it, neither 
yet now are ye able.
HEBREWS 5:11-14 (Comments in parentheses)
11 Of whom we have many things to say, and 
hard to be uttered, seeing ye are dull of hearing. 
(Some things are hard to get over to folks 
because they are dull of hearing.)
12 For when for the time ye ought to be 
teachers, ye have need that one teach you again 
which be the first principles of the oracles of 
God; and are become such as have need of milk, 
and not of strong meat.
13 For every one that useth milk is unskilful in 
the word of righteousness (The margin reads 
'hath no experience in the word of 
righteousness.' Now why has he no 
86

RECEIVING THE KNOWLEDGE
experience in the word of righteousness?): 
for he is a babe.
14 But strong meat belongeth to them that 
are of full age (mature), even those who by 
reason of use have their senses exercised to 
discern both good and evil.
They had the same problem then we face now—
that of growing. They were just like us. They should 
have been teachers, but they still needed to be taught. 
They couldn't be taught anything very deep, but still 
had to be taught the milk. Paul said, "I fed you on milk 
for you couldn't take the meat."
The milk of the Word he's talking about here is the 
preaching and staying with the first principles of the 
doctrine of Christ (Hebrews 6:1-2). Paul calls that the 
milk of the Word, not the strong meat. When you still 
have to be taught the first principles, you are still on 
the milk. It seems to me that's about what we've done
—and about what we've had to do.
But how are we going to grow up? Look back at 
this clause in Ephesians 4:13 which speaks about 
growing in "the knowledge of the Son of God" unto a 
perfect man.
Receiving the knowledge, feeding upon God's 
Word: Until you gain a knowledge of the plan of God 
which He planned and sent the Lord Jesus to 
consummate...Until you gain a knowledge of what you 
87

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
are in Christ, and Christ in you...Until you gain a 
knowledge of what He did for you in His death, burial, 
resurrection, ascension, and seating at the right hand of 
the Father...Until you gain a knowledge of what He's 
doing for you right now, seated at the right hand of the 
Father where He ever liveth to make intercession for 
you...Until you gain a knowledge of your standing 
before the throne of God...Until you gain a knowledge 
of the fact that He defeated Satan and demons, and that 
all the forces of the rulers of the darkness of this world 
are dethroned powers, and that they can't rule over 
you.
When you do that, you're getting out beyond milk. 
But you can't preach that to some folks. You can't get 
too deep in there. To be honest with you, I know a lot 
of things I've never taught yet. Why not? Folks have to 
be ready for it. (Paul said in effect, "There are some 
things I'd like to teach you, but you couldn't bear it." 
They couldn't take it.) And I don't mean it's some far 
fetched revelation. It is the pure simple Word of God. 
But it is beyond where we have been. So we have to 
go slowly so folks can assimilate what we do give 
them.
The Wrong Diet
Why haven't we grown?
88

RECEIVING THE KNOWLEDGE
If we are real children of God, born of God, and we 
haven't grown, it is because we haven't had the right 
diet.
I don't blame people. I'm not scolding you. I'm 
thoroughly convinced the ministry is to blame. I 
believe most people—99.99 out of 100—would rise to 
the level of the Word of God for them if they knew it.
But just because a man is one of the ministry gifts
—apostle, prophet, evangelist, pastor, teacher—doesn't 
mean he's a full grown Christian. It just means he has 
that calling on his life. He still has to develop and 
grow himself.
In the last church I pastored, during the winter of 
1947 and 1948, I shut myself up in the church, 
sometimes for days at a time, with the Word. I would 
kneel and read the Bible on my knees. I read for hours, 
and for weeks. I had read it for years, of course, but 
this time I took those two prayers Paul prayed for the 
church at Ephesus—Ephesians 1:17-19, and 3:14-21.
I would leave one of my Bibles open to that place 
all week. And every time I came into the building I 
would get on my knees and say, "Father, I'm praying 
these prayers for myself." If I had to make a call or 
something arose, when I'd come back, even though I 
may have already done it several times that day, I'd 
pray these prayers for myself. "...That the eyes of my 
understanding be enlightened, that I may know what is 
89

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
the hope of His calling,...." And so on.
It didn't seem to do a bit of good for a while. But I 
just kept on praying them. Then—after a while—I 
began to get revelation from the Word. (He couldn't 
have revealed the Word to me if I hadn't been feeding 
on it.) It began to open up to me!
Within a few weeks, 30 days or so, I'd learned 
more than I'd learned in the previous 13 or 14 years of 
ministry put together. I said to my wife, "What in the 
world have I been preaching? My, my, my, that little 
old stuff I've been putting out wasn't even milk. It was 
just bluejohn."
This didn't come just because I prayed. That was 
just a part of it. I spent equal time, if not more, with 
the Word as I did praying. You can't build a prayer life 
just praying alone. It has to be built upon God's Word.
So when the Bible speaks about our becoming a 
perfect man, the terminology "knowledge of the Son of 
God" is used (Ephesians 4:13). It infers that it is this 
knowledge which will cause us to become full grown, 
and cause us to become mature.
The Place of Right Teaching
We have failed to grow because of the lack of right 
teaching. God put teachers in the church. He set them 
in there. (Ephesians 4:11, I Corinthians 12:28.)
90

RECEIVING THE KNOWLEDGE
There are some ways all of us could do some 
teaching. From the natural standpoint we could tell 
some people what we know and could teach them to 
some extent. But on the other hand, there are those 
who are called of God, and anointed by the Spirit of 
God, to teach.
Of course, the Holy Ghost is also to be our teacher. 
But, after all, that is the Holy Ghost teaching us when 
He anoints men to teach. Some people get off on the 
idea that "No one can tell me anything. I don't need to 
be taught. I've got the Holy Ghost and I know as much 
as anyone knows." That is ignorance. God's Word 
declares that He set teachers in the Church to teach us.
I'm afraid though that much of our so-called 
teaching has been out of our minds and not out of our 
hearts. We've gained a general head knowledge, 
mental knowledge, of the Word but never got the 
spiritual import of it. Through the years what we've 
known as teaching has been so cold and dead and not 
much to it, we almost turn up our noses at the mention 
of it.
But the anointing of the Spirit of God upon genuine 
teaching of the Word of God is alive!
I didn't know the difference myself one day. I used 
to be a preacher. I could preach Spurgeon's sermons as 
well as anyone. I could read them and preach them 
word for word. I learned to sermonize and studied 
91

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
homiletics. I loved to preach with that old evangelistic 
fire and fervor. And, once in a while, I crack down on 
it and do it yet.
I was pastor of a church in North Central Texas in 
1943. I'd never been a teacher until then. I didn't like to 
teach. It was their custom in this church that the pastor 
have at the Sunday School hour on Sunday morning 
the auditorium Bible class. It was made up of adult 
men and women. I didn't want to teach it. But it was 
their custom. I had a Sunday School book which I 
wouldn't look at all week. I studied the Bible and 
prepared sermons, but I wouldn't even look at this 
lesson until Saturday night. I knew I could read it over 
in 10 or 15 minutes and get up and tell it. They all 
seemed to enjoy it, but I was never so glad of anything 
in my life as when that class period was over. I wanted 
to preach.
But at 3 o'clock one Thursday afternoon in the 
parsonage of this church, God gave me a teaching gift. 
I knew it on the inside of me. I knew when it was born. 
I said out loud, "I can teach now."
To prove this, I started out in a most unlikely way. 
I didn't use any of the other main services where folks 
would come anyway. A ladies' prayer group met on 
Wednesday afternoons at the church and I started 
teaching them.
Do you know what surprised me? I could stand 
92

RECEIVING THE KNOWLEDGE
there just as still, and never move out of my tracks, 
never raise my hands, and the anointing would come 
on me greater than anything I ever sensed.
I began to teach those seven or eight ladies. They 
told their husbands and others. In two or three weeks, 
fifteen or twenty were coming. Some of the husbands 
took off from their jobs to come. Before you knew it, 
we had more people on Wednesday afternoon than on 
Wednesday night. Before you knew it, the church 
building was practically full.
That proved to me people want to learn and want to 
know.
Several years after I left that church I ran into one 
of those ladies. She said, "Thank God for those 
teaching sessions. That's all I've been living on for the 
past seven years. If I hadn't gotten that, I'm sure I 
would never have made it. I'm still feeding on it. I've 
never heard any teaching since then. All we get is 
preaching."
We need preaching all right. But believers need 
teaching. People of God need teaching.
Come back to Jesus and His ministry for a moment.
MATTHEW 9:35
35 And Jesus went about all the cities and 
villages, teaching in their synagogues, and 
preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and 
healing every sickness and every disease 
93

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
among the people.
Reading through the four Gospels, every time He 
went into the synagogue, He always taught.
Down by the seashore one day He was teaching. 
The crowd pushed Him back to the shore. A couple of 
fellows were there washing and mending their nets as 
they had been fishing. One of them was Simon Peter. 
Jesus asked if He could borrow his boat, got in it and 
pushed a little way from shore. And it says, "He sat 
down and taught the people out of the ship" (Luke 
5:3).
After he was baptized and the Holy Ghost came 
upon Him in the bodily form as a dove, and He was 
led by the Spirit into the wilderness and tempted of the 
devil. And after He came back in the power of the 
Spirit into Galilee, Luke 4:15 says, "And he taught in 
their synagogues, being glorified of all."
These were the people of God of that day. The 
synagogue would correspond to the church house of 
today. Every time He went into it, He taught.
The lack of right teaching is the primary reason 
we've failed to grow. Certainly we can study for 
ourselves and grow to some extent. But God also put 
teachers in the Church to help us to grow, to feed us 
upon God's Word.
94

RECEIVING THE KNOWLEDGE
The Fault of Inadequate Teaching
The Church has not majored in the things it should 
have. As one fellow said, "She has majored in the 
minors." When something was taught or preached, it 
was something of minor importance rather than 
something of major importance.
If you're going to grow, you'll have to be fed on the 
Word of God.
The Church has been strong in teaching man his 
need of righteousness, his weakness and inability to 
please God. It has been strong in denouncing sins in 
the believer. It has preached against unbelief, world 
conformity, and lack of faith.
But the Church has been sadly lacking in bringing 
forth the truth of what we are in Christ, and of how 
righteousness and faith are available.
A lot of people will tell you what you need, but 
they won't tell you how to get it. And you're not a bit 
better off. It's like one man said as they went away 
from church. His wife noticed something was wrong 
with him.
"What's the matter?" she said.
"I don't know," he said. "I'm disappointed and 
discouraged."
"With what?"
"With the church. With our pastor. He preached on 
95

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
faith this morning. He quoted all those wonderful 
scriptures. 'All things are possible to him that 
believeth.' 'What things soever you desire, when you 
pray, believe that ye receive them, and you shall have 
them.' He told us what faith would do if we had it. And 
he told us we ought to get it. But he didn't tell us how. 
I'm just hanging out here in the air. I know I ought to 
get it. I know what it would do if I had it. But I don't 
know how to get it."
The real truth about it is he had faith all the time. 
Faith to be saved. If he had been taught correctly, he 
would have known he could have fed that measure of 
faith on God's Word and it would grow. He could use 
that same faith to receive healing for his body. He 
could use that same faith to get answers to prayer. He 
could use that same faith to be filled with the Holy 
Ghost. But he didn't know it.
You can't blame him, because what he heard 
hindered him more than it helped him. It didn't feed 
him. It took out of him.
There was a glow about the face of an obviously 
refined lady when she came up after the final service 
to shake hands with me. It was the first time she'd 
come up during the three-week meeting but I'd 
watched her blossom and open up.
She said, "Brother Hagin, thank you."
"For what?"
96

RECEIVING THE KNOWLEDGE
"For the Word. You've given me back my joy of 
salvation."
I said, "Praise the Lord."
She said, "I'm a visitor here. The last service I 
attended in my church, and I can understand that the 
pastor was trying to get us to pray; but instead of 
preaching it the right way to make us want to, he beat 
us over the head for nearly an hour. When he got 
through I went to the altar, got on my knees, and stuck 
my head under the altar. I said, 'Dear God, I don't 
know whether I'm saved or not. I don't know whether I 
have anything or not. I don't know where I am or who 
I am.' I stayed there and cried until about 1:30 in the 
afternoon. But you've encouraged us to pray. And I 
believe I'm praying more than I ever did in my life. I 
know I'm enjoying my fellowship with the Lord more 
than ever. I know I've got back the joy that I had when 
I was first a newborn babe."
One reason we haven't grown is we've preached to 
believers like they were sinners. We've treated them 
like they were sinners, and fed them like they were 
sinners, until we've undermined their faith.
We need to present God's blessings and God's 
power in such a way that folks want to do it, and get so 
hungry they can't help but do it. If you have to force 
people, it isn't going to work or be much of a blessing 
or benefit to them anyhow.
97

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
I'm talking about things that defeat us.
Our ministry, maybe unconsciously, has fed the 
congregations a psychology of unbelief. Instead of 
talking about what they have, they talk about what 
they don't have.
They talk about politics. Where did Jesus ever say 
to go into all the world and preach politics? He didn't. 
Where did you ever read that Jesus said, "Go into all 
the world and give a book review."? You didn't. He 
said, "Go into all the world and preach the Gospel."
Unconsciously, our ministry has fed us on a 
psychology of unbelief.
Most of the songs we sing are not really scriptural. 
(I'm talking about things that keep us from growing.) 
Most hymns put off redemption until after death.
"We don't have much here;
Can't expect much here;
But we're going to have it after
awhile.
We're going to have to do the best
we can here;
And wander around like a begger
in this old gloomy world.
When we all get to heaven, it'll be
different."
It would be different now if you'd believe God!
98

RECEIVING THE KNOWLEDGE
Listen to the songs. Listen to the sermons.
They tell you we have the promise of eternal life—
preaching to believers. We don't have the promise of 
eternal life. The sinner does. We have it! Eternal life 
isn't something you're going to have when you get to 
heaven. It's something you have right now.
I JOHN 5:13
13 These things have I written unto you that 
believe on the name of the Son of God; that ye 
may know that ye have eternal life....
Present tense. "Have."
The Bible says that we have passed from death, 
spiritual death, unto life (I John 3:14). That Greek 
word for life here is "zoe." It's the same word that's 
used in John 3:16, "...that whosoever believeth in him 
should not perish, but have everlasting life."
Jesus said, "The thief cometh not, but for to steal, 
and to kill, and to destroy: I am come—(What did you 
come for, Jesus?)—I am come that they might have 
life..."
That's why He came! That we might have zoe! 
Life! Sometimes it's translated "life." Sometimes, 
"eternal life." And sometimes, "everlasting life." But 
it's all the same.
He said, "...I am come that they might have zoe, 
and that they might have it more abundantly" (John 
99

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
10:10).
He said you can have this Life right now—and you 
can have an abundance of it! That's why He came!
I listened to a radio preacher telling about how we 
have the promise of it, and we're going to have it one 
of these days. No, if you don't have it in this life, you'll 
never have it in the after life.
"For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God 
is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord" (Romans 
6:23). It's a gift you receive now! You receive this Life
—this zoe, the life of God, the God-kind of Life—into 
your spirit, into your inward being.
It changes your life! This Life is the nature of God. 
It makes you a new creature and displaces that old 
nature you had on the inside of you. So you become a 
new man in Christ Jesus, with a new nature, "...old 
things are passed away; behold, all things are become 
new" (II Corinthians 5:17).
But most of our hymns we sing put redemption and 
eternal life off until after death. "We're going to have it 
then."
"We're going to have rest when we get to 
heaven."
Do you know what the Bible teaches? It teaches we 
can have rest and peace right now. Jesus said:
100

RECEIVING THE KNOWLEDGE
MATTHEW 11:28-30
28 Come unto me, all ye that labour and are 
heavy laden, and I will give you rest.
29 Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; 
for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye 
shall find rest unto your souls.
30 For my yoke is easy, and my burden is 
light.
The way some people talk, I just wonder what 
they're yoked up with. It's always a hard luck story. 
Always going through a trial. Always having a hard 
time. Always scraping the bottom of the barrel, or else 
under the barrel with the barrel on top. "Oh, this heavy 
burden we have to bear. We're going to lay down our 
heavy burdens one day."
Oh, no. You lay them down when you find Jesus. 
"My yoke is easy, and my burden is light," He said. It's 
not hard. It's not burdensome. It's not heavy.
What are they yoked up with? Unconsciously 
they've gotten yoked with unbelief. Though they 
actually belong to Jesus and have been born-again, 
they have gotten yoked up with unbelief and their 
burden became heavy instead of light. They couldn't 
sleep. Couldn't eat. They felt like they had butterflies 
in their stomach.
When there is rest in your soul, it will affect your 
body. It will affect your entire being.
101

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
"We're going to have victory after while."
No, thank God, we have victory right now!
I JOHN 5:4
4 For whatsoever is born of God overcometh 
the world: and this is the victory that 
overcometh the world, even our faith.
"We're going to be overcomers when we get 
to heaven"
No, we're overcomers now!
"If God be for us who can be against us?" (Romans 
8:31). He's on our side. We're victors now. We're 
overcomers now.
"We're going to have peace with God when 
we get to heaven."
That isn't what the Bible says. Romans 5:1 says, 
"Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with 
God through our Lord Jesus Christ." It's wonderful to 
have that peace.
The Bible does say, "There is no peace, saith the 
Lord, unto the wicked" (Isaiah 48:22). If I didn't have 
this peace I'd go to checking up on myself. But He 
102

RECEIVING THE KNOWLEDGE
didn't say that to Christians. He said it to sinners.
When you preach to Christians like they were 
sinners you build that kind of consciousness in them. 
You hold them under condemnation. They can't grow. 
It's impossible. It's the wrong diet. It isn't even the 
sincere milk of the Word.
Dr. John Alexander Dowie said, "Our songs are 
embalmed with unbelief." That's kept us from 
growing. We've sung those songs so much we think 
they're so. I don't want to bind you, but it would be 
better not to sing than to sing a bunch of junk, a bunch 
of unbelief.
"There will be no more failing when we get to 
heaven. We have nothing on this side and can't 
expect anything on this side except failure, 
misery, disappointment, and weakness."
That isn't what the Word of God teaches. Paul said, 
"We're more than conquerors." Not just conquerors. 
More than conquerors!
"Yes, but Paul was an apostle," someone said.
Paul didn't say he was a conqueror because he was 
an apostle. He said, "...we are more than conquerors 
through him that loved us" (Romans 8:37). Christ 
didn't belong to Paul anymore than He does to us.
103

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
That doesn't mean you won't have any tests. That 
doesn't mean you won't have any trials. That doesn't 
mean it's just going to fall on you like ripe cherries off 
a tree. Or that you're going to float down the river of 
time on flowery beds of ease.
It didn't with Paul. He got in jail. He got his back 
beat. He got his feet in stocks. He was in the innermost 
prison with every reason in the world to gripe and 
complain. But at midnight he and Silas prayed and 
sang praises to God!
When he got on board that ship a prisoner he said, 
"Sirs, I perceive that this voyage will be with hurt and 
much damage, not only of the lading and ship, but also 
of our lives" (Acts 27:10). They didn't pay any 
attention to him. Everything seemed to be all right. But 
before it was all over he was running the thing. He 
started on the bottom, but wound up captain of the 
boat.
Don't stay on the bottom! You don't have to. Do 
you know what brought Paul out? You can see it in his 
words.
When all hope that they should be saved was gone, 
old Paul stepped forth right in the midst of it with the 
answer. He'd heard from heaven. (We have God's 
Word and we've heard from heaven. It couldn't be 
anymore sure if an angel came down from heaven and 
wrote it with his finger in a granite rock. That couldn't 
104

RECEIVING THE KNOWLEDGE
be any more sure than God's written Word.)
Old Paul said, "Sirs . . . there stood by me this 
night the angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve, 
Saying, Fear not, Paul; thou must be brought before 
Caesar: and, lo, God hath given thee all them that sail 
with thee. Wherefore, sirs, be of good cheer: for I 
believe God, that it shall be even as it was told me" 
(Acts 27:21-25).
I like that fellow Paul. He made three positive 
confessions: "I belong to God. I serve God. I believe 
God." And that's what caused him to rise.
If he'd been like most folks, he would have been 
whipped right in the midst of this crisis and he and the 
whole bunch would have gone down. For most folks 
would have said, "I've been trying to serve Him all 
these many years. The Lord knows I've been trying to 
serve Him. If He doesn't intervene somehow, we're all 
going."
And they would have gone. I'm not making fun. I'm 
just stating facts. That's what defeats us.
Paul didn't say, "I'm trying to serve Him." He said, 
"I am serving Him . . . The God whose I am ... I 
belong to Him."
Someone said, "I hope I do."
Thank God, I know I do. I belong to Him. I serve 
Him. I believe Him.
105
