Growing Up, Spiritually
Chapter 5: 5 WALKING WITH YOUR FATHER

"Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought 
for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall 
drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put 
on. Is not the life more than meat, and the body 
than raiment?
Behold the fowls of the air: for they sow not, 
neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet 
your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are ye not 
much better than they?
Which of you by taking thought can add one 
cubit unto his stature?
And why take ye thought for raiment?
Consider the lilies of the field, how they 
grow; they toil not, neither do they spin:
54

WALKING WITH YOUR FATHER
And yet I say unto you, That even Solomon in 
all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.
Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the 
field, which today is, and tomorrow is cast into 
the oven, shall he not much more clothe you, 0 
ye of little faith?
Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall 
we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, 
Wherewithal shall we be clothed?
(For after all these things do the Gentiles 
seek:) for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye 
have need of all these things.
But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his 
righteousness; and all these things shall be 
added unto you.
Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for 
the morrow shall take thought for the things of 
itself. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof."
—Matthew 6:25-34
This is a marvelous section of scripture. But for the 
time being there are just two portions of it I want you 
to notice. In the 32nd verse, "for your heavenly Father 
knoweth that ye have need of all these things." And in 
the 26th verse, "your heavenly Father feedeth them."
This isn't talking about sinners (unbelievers) here, 
because He is not the heavenly Father of sinners. To 
listen to some people talk we are all children of God; 
God is the Father of all of us, and we're all brothers 
55

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
and sisters. But no, we are not. The devil is the father 
of some people.
Jesus said to some of the most religious people of 
that day, "Ye are of your father the devil" (John 8:44). 
He didn't say our heavenly Father was their father. He 
said the devil was their father.
Yet even though we have been born-again, and 
have become children of God, I think so many times 
we have never really become acquainted with our 
Father. Our theme is growing—growing up spiritually. 
We need to grow by becoming acquainted with our 
heavenly Father.
When I was teaching down in East Texas on this 
subject a woman said to me, "Brother Hagin, I've been 
saved for eleven years. And ever since I've been saved 
I've loved Jesus. But somehow I just didn't become 
acquainted with the Father like I should. Since you've 
been teaching along this line though, I have become 
acquainted with my Heavenly Father. And I'm just 
about to love Him to death."
That was her expression.
There is no truth in all the Bible as far reaching as 
the blessed fact that if we have been born-again and 
come into the family of God, God the Father is our 
Father, and He cares for us.
He is interested in us. I mean in each one of us 
individually; not just as a group, or a body, or a 
56

WALKING WITH YOUR FATHER
church. He is interested in each of His children and He 
loves every single one of us with the same love.
Jesus was actually preaching here in Matthew to 
the Jews. Yet one reason they didn't understand Him 
was, He talked about God as being His Father. He 
endeavored to introduce to them a kind, loving, 
Heavenly Father. They couldn't understand that kind 
of a God. His message was, "For God so loved the 
world that He gave...." They couldn't comprehend it.
The Old Covenant was the covenant of the law of 
sin and death. It was the law of an eye for an eye and a 
tooth for a tooth. You knock my eye out and I'll knock 
your eye out.
It was the law where God demanded, in awful 
judgment, love and so forth. They were not able to do 
it because their natures had not been changed. So He 
set up the Levitical priesthood whereby the blood of 
animals could be shed to cover their sins so they could 
be counted righteous in His sight and He could bless 
them. The sins of the people could be confessed over 
the head of the scapegoat. The goat let go in the 
wilderness. And judgment fell out there instead of on 
them. They had come up in this hard, harsh 
atmosphere of justice.
When God gave Moses the tables of stone of the 
law, fire and vapor of smoke overshadowed the 
mountain. If even an animal touched it he was thrust 
57

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
through with a sword.
In the Old Testament after they built the tabernacle 
first and the temple secondly, they didn't know Him as 
Father God. They knew Him as Elohim, or Jehovah. 
They did not know Him personally. They had no 
personal acquaintance with Him. His Presence was 
kept shut up in the Holy of Holies. It was necessary 
that every male throughout Israel, at least once a year, 
go up to Jerusalem to the temple to present himself 
before God. That's where He was. And even then they 
didn't dare enter into His Presence.
No one entered His Presence save the high priest. 
And he only under great precaution. For if you 
intruded into that place in the wrong way, and some 
did, you fell down dead instantly. This high priest, 
after offering sacrifice by the blood of animals for his 
own sins and the sins of the people, could enter into 
the Holy of Holies and receive atonement for their sins
—pushing them off, so to speak, into the future.
That was the hard, harsh atmosphere they had 
come up in. It is no wonder that when Jesus came 
along to introduce them to a loving, kind, Heavenly 
Father, they couldn't understand it.
But I'm afraid that is not only true concerning those 
Jews—I'm afraid it is true concerning the sons and 
daughters of Almighty God today. They have never 
really become acquainted with Him as being their 
58

WALKING WITH YOUR FATHER
Father.
Here are some of the things Jesus said about the 
Father.
"And in that day ye shall ask me nothing. Verily, 
verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the 
Father in my name, he will give it you" (John 16:23).
"For the Father himself loveth you...." (John 
16:27).
"...for your Father knoweth what things ye have 
need of, before ye ask him. After this manner therefore 
pray ye: Our Father...." (Matthew 6:8-9). Notice the 
utter tenderness of it, "Our Father...."
I like something Paul said when he prayed for the 
church at Ephesus. He began his prayer like this, "For 
this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, of whom the whole family in heaven and 
earth is named" (Ephesians 3:14-15).
Oh, I like to do that. I like to get on my knees and 
repeat those words of Paul, "I bow my knees unto the 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole 
family in heaven and earth is named." That makes it so 
real. It takes it out of a hard, harsh religious 
atmosphere. This isn't religion. It hasn't a thing in the 
world to do with religion.
Some folks say, "Do you have religion?"
Thank God, I don't have a bit of it. I don't want 
any. When it's religion, it's "God"—but when it's 
59

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
family, it's "Father."
He may be "God" to the sinner, but He's "Father" 
to me. "I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, of whom the whole family...." It becomes 
the Father and His family! We are in the family of 
God. It's not important what church you are in—the 
thing that's important is what family you are in.
Getting Acquainted Through the Word
I'm glad I'm in His family. I want to become better 
acquainted with my Father, don't you? I want to know 
Him better, don't you? Thank God, we can.
How? How can we know more about Him? How 
can we become better acquainted with our Father?
I like something Smith Wigglesworth said, "I can't 
understand God by feelings. I understand God the 
Father by what the Word says about Him. He is 
everything the Word says He is. Get acquainted with 
the Father through the Word."
It is in the Word that we find out about Him, about 
His love, about His nature, about how He cares for us, 
about how He loves us. Jesus himself said, "Man shall 
not live by bread alone—(How shall he live?)—but by 
every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God."
MATTHEW 6:26
60

WALKING WITH YOUR FATHER
26 Behold the fowls of the air: for they sow not, 
neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet 
your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are ye not 
much better than they?
The folks Jesus was preaching to never grasped it. 
It was new to them. It's almost new to us. We've never 
grasped it, because most of us have been taught to fear 
and shrink from a God of justice. We have never seen 
the love side of God that Jesus came to bring us.
MATTHEW 6:30-31
30 Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the 
field, which today is, and tomorrow is cast into 
the oven, shall he not much more clothe you, O 
ye of little faith?
31 Therefore take no thought, saying, What 
shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, 
Wherewithal shall we be clothed?
One translation says, "Be therefore not faithless 
saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we 
drink?...." When you talk that way you are without 
faith.
MATTHEW 6:32-33
32 (For after all these things do the Gentiles 
seek;) for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye 
have need of all these things.
33 But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and 
his righteousness; and all these things shall be 
61

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
added unto you.
They won't be taken from you—they'll be added to 
you! This proves the Father cares for His own.
MATTHEW 6:34
34 Take therefore no thought for the morrow: 
for the morrow shall take thought for the things 
of itself. Sufficient unto the day is the evil 
thereof.
I like the translation that reads, "Be not anxious for 
the morrow." Sometimes you do have to think about 
tomorrow to make an appointment or plan something. 
Really the thought He's trying to get over is, "Don't 
worry about tomorrow." God doesn't want His children 
full of worry. He doesn't want us full of fretting. Why? 
Because He loves us.
Your Heavenly Father knoweth that you have need 
of these things. So have no worry, no fret, no anxiety. 
If He is your Father, you can be assured He will take a 
father's place and will perform a father's part. You may 
be certain that if He is your Father, He loves you, and 
He will care for you.
JOHN 14:21-23
21 He that hath my commandments, and 
keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he 
that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and 
I will love him, and will manifest myself to 
62

WALKING WITH YOUR FATHER
him.
22 Judas saith unto him, not Iscariot, Lord, how 
is it that thou wilt manifest thyself unto us, and 
not unto the world?
23 Jesus answered and said unto him, If a man 
love me, he will keep my words: and my Father 
will love him, and we will come unto him, and 
make our abode with him.
Here we have the revelation of the Father's attitude 
toward His own children. Two things are emphasized:
1. That you keep my commandments. What are 
Jesus' commandments? He said, "A new 
commandment I give unto you, That ye love one 
another; as I have loved you...." (John 13:34). That 
sums it up. There's no use worrying about any other 
commandments for "...love is the fulfilling of the law" 
(Romans 13:10). If you keep Jesus' commandments, 
you will have fulfilled all the rest of the 
commandments.
2. You shall be loved of my father. If you walk in 
love, you walk in God's realm, for God is Love. (We'll 
go into the love-walk further in chapter six.) The great 
Father God is a love God. His very nature—because 
He is Love—compels Him to care for us, protect us, 
and shield us.
MATTHEW 7:11
11 If ye then, being evil, know how to give 
63

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
good gifts unto your children, how much 
more shall your Father which is in heaven 
give good things to them that ask him?
How much morel That sends a thrill through my 
spirit. How much more! Are you a parent? Would you 
have it as your plan, purpose and will that your 
children go through life poverty-stricken, nose-to-the-
grindstone, sick, afflicted, downtrodden, downcast, 
down-and-out? No! Parents will sacrifice because they 
love their children. They'll work and sacrifice to help 
their children gain an education so they can have 
things better in life than they had. They want to shield 
them, because they love them, from some of the 
bumps and knocks and hard times they had. Just 
natural folks are that way. That's what Jesus said. "If 
ye then, being evil (or natural)...."
Our relationship as sons and daughters is a 
challenge to His love. We hold the same relationship 
to the Father that Jesus did when He walked on earth.
JOHN 17:23
23 I in them, and thou in me, that they may be 
made perfect in one; and that the world may 
know that thou hast sent me, and hast loved 
them, as thou hast loved me.
The Father loves us just as He loved Jesus! And if 
He loves me as He loves Jesus, I'm not afraid to face 
64

WALKING WITH YOUR FATHER
life's problems. For He is with me as He was with the 
Master.
JOHN 16:32
32 Behold, the hour cometh, yea, is now come, 
that ye shall be scattered, every man to his own, 
and shall leave me alone: and yet I am not 
alone, because the Father is with me.
You and I can say, "I am not alone, because the 
Father is with me." For if He loves me as He loved 
Jesus, then He's with me as He was with Jesus. I am 
not alone.
JOHN 16:27
27 For the Father himself loveth you, because 
ye have loved me, and have believed that I 
came out from God.
Nothing can be stronger or more comforting than 
this fact: The Father Himself knows you, and He loves 
you, and He longs to bless you.
Against the background of all these statements 
Jesus made relative to the Father, other scriptures take 
on new light; they become immediately more real to 
us.
I PETER 5:7
7 Casting all your care upon him; for he careth 
for you.
65

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
This is a message from the very heart of the Father 
God to me, to you. He wants us to end worry—to end 
fear and doubt. You might say, "Can I do it?" 
Certainly. "How?" By casting all your care upon Him. 
He wants you to abandon yourself to His love and His 
care so He said, "Casting all your care upon Him, for 
He careth for you." Or, as the Amplified translation 
reads, and I love this, "Casting the whole of your care
—all your anxieties, all your worries, all your 
concerns, once and for all—on Him; for He cares for 
you affectionately, and cares about you watchfully."
PHILIPPIANS 4:6
6 Be careful for nothing; but in every thing by 
prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let 
your requests be made known unto God.
Again, the Amplified translation says, "Do not fret 
or have any anxiety about anything,...." That's our 
Father speaking to us. Our Heavenly Father wants to 
walk with us just as He walked with Jesus when He 
was here on the earth.
PHILIPPIANS 4:13
13 I can do all things through Christ which 
strengtheneth me.
Some have said, "Yes, but Paul said that and he 
was an Apostle." Paul didn't say he could do all things 
because he was an Apostle. He said he could do all 
66

WALKING WITH YOUR FATHER
things through Christ. Paul wasn't in Christ any more 
than I am in Christ, or any more than you are in Christ. 
It was Christ who strengthened him. And the Father is 
just as real—if we let Him be—to us as He was to 
Paul, or even to Jesus. And He's sending a message 
from His heart of Love to you and me. He's telling us: 
You can do anything. You can rise to the place where 
you're unafraid in the most unpleasant circumstances 
because you know that your Father is on your side. "If 
God be for us, who can be against us?" (Romans 8:31).
The Father's love—and remember He is Love—
compels Him to care for us. When you come to know 
His love and to swing free in that love, then all doubts 
and fears will be destroyed.
PSALM 27:1
1 The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom 
shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life; 
of whom shall I be afraid?
When you remember it is this wonderful Heavenly 
Father who loves us even as He loved Jesus, then you 
can understand that we need not be afraid, even as 
Jesus was not afraid. He is your Light. He is your 
Deliverance. (Salvation in this verse means 
deliverance.) He is the Strength of your life. Light! 
Deliverance! Strength! Then there's nothing to fear. 
What can man do to the man whom God loves and 
67

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
protects?
HEBREWS 13:5-6
5 ...for he hath said, I will never leave thee, nor 
forsake thee.
6 So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my 
helper, and I will not fear what man shall do 
unto me.
He's your Helper! And He will meet your needs!
PHILIPPIANS 4:19
19 But my God shall supply all your need 
according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus.
This is not religion. It's not preaching. It's a living 
truth from the heart of our wonderful, lovely, Father 
God to us. He wants us to know that He will supply all 
our needs according to His riches in glory by Christ 
Jesus.
Experiencing Acquaintance
PSALM 23:1-6
1 The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want.
2 He maketh me to lie down in green pastures: 
he leadeth me beside the still waters.
3 He restoreth my soul: he leadeth me in the 
paths of righteousness for his name's sake.
4 Yea, though I walk through the valley of the 
68

WALKING WITH YOUR FATHER
shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for thou art 
with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.
5 Thou preparest a table before me in the 
presence of mine enemies: thou anointest my 
head with oil; my cup runneth over.
6 Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me 
all the days of my life: and I will dwell in the 
house of the Lord for ever.
To me, no passage describes the love-attitude of 
the Father and Jesus toward us more beautifully than 
the 23rd Psalm.
Many Psalms are prophetic. The 22nd Psalm is a 
picture of Jesus dying. In the 23rd Psalm He is the 
Good Shepherd. The 24th Psalm shows Him as the 
coming King of kings and Lord of lords upon this 
earth.
We are living in the 23rd Psalm right now. "The 
Lord is my shepherd." When Jesus came He said, "I 
am (present tense) the good shepherd." Romans 10:9 
says, "That if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the 
Lord Jesus, (or, Jesus as Lord)...." The Lord is my 
shepherd. Now. We live in the 23rd Psalm.
This is my interpretation of the 23rd Psalm, I 
always say it this way: "The Lord is my shepherd, I do 
not want." I do not want. Perfect satisfaction. The 
ultimate of living.
Verse 2 is where the luscious clover and tender 
69

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
grass carpet the ground. No effort on my part is 
required to have or to get enough.
He leads me beside the water, waters of stillness. 
Water and food are the requisites that sustain life. 
Thank God, He leads me, He leadeth me, He supplies 
every need.
He makes me lie down and rest in safety and 
quietness in the pastures of plenty. Near me is a 
babbling brook. Its Living Waters answer the cry of 
my heart. I have water. I have food. I have protection. 
I have shelter. I have His care. This is my Father.
When I am frightened and filled with fear, when 
my whole being is convulged with agony, He restoreth 
my soul. He keeps me quiet. He makes me normal 
again. He brushes away my fears and anxieties, holds 
me to His breast, and breathes into me courage and 
faith.
My heart laughs at my enemies, for He guideth me 
down the paths of grace through the realm of 
righteousness where I stand in His Presence as though 
sin had never been; and romp and play in the throne 
room of grace with never a thought, nor a fear, nor a 
dread. My Father, you see, is the One who is on the 
throne.
He may be Judge to the world, and God to the 
sinner, but He's Father to me.
And sometimes I come in, most of the time in fact 
70

WALKING WITH YOUR FATHER
to visit with Him and I hear Him say, "Son, is there 
anything you want? What can I do for you?"
And I say, "Father, I don't want a thing. You're so 
wonderful, and so lovely, and so good you've already 
provided for me all I'll ever need. And you wrote me a 
letter and told me about it. So I don't have a care. I 
don't have a need. I don't have a want that hasn't been 
met. No, I didn't come for something. I'll tell you, 
Father, I just came in to visit with you for awhile. I 
just wanted to hang around the throne. I like to be near 
you, Father."
My Father said to me (Oh, I could hear His voice 
so plainly as He spoke to me), "Son, you don't know 
how that delights my heart. No earthly father ever 
desired the companionship and the fellowship of his 
children any more than I, the Heavenly Father, desire 
the fellowship and companionship of my children.
"You know," He said to me, "I made man so I'd 
have someone to fellowship with. I made man for my 
companion. In fact, I'll put it this way (and He said it 
in just these words), I made man so I'd have someone 
to pal with. I put Adam on the earth in the garden, and 
in the cool of the day, I'd go down and walk and talk 
with him."
It is so blessed and so beautiful and so wonderful to 
be able to walk with God.
71
