Growing Up, Spiritually
Chapter 1: 1 LOCATING YOURSELF

"... When he (Christ) ascended up on high, he 
led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto 
men...And he gave some, apostles; and some, 
prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, 
pastors and teachers; For the perfecting of the 
saints, for the work of the ministry, for the 
edifying of the body of Christ: Till we all come 
in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of 
the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the 
measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ: 
That we henceforth be no more children, tossed 
to and fro, and carried about with every wind of 
doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning 
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive; 
10

LOCATING YOURSELF
But speaking the truth in love, may grow up 
into him in all things, which is the head, even 
Christ:"
—Ephesians 4:8, 11-15
Evidently Paul didn't consider the church at 
Ephesus to be grown up yet. Did you notice he said, 
"But speaking the truth in love, may grow up...."?
And, "Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and 
of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect 
man...."
This is the King James translation. I think when it 
says "perfect" our minds tend to run off on a little 
tangent and we miss what he's saying to us. Moffat's 
translation reads, "until we reach maturity." The 
Amplified translation says, "that we might arrive at 
really mature manhood." Paul is talking about growing 
up to be a man, or a mature person, spiritually. "That 
we henceforth be no more children." He's talking 
about growing up spiritually, about reaching spiritual 
maturity, about becoming a full grown man spiritually.
God wants us to grow.
And the Bible teaches that there is a striking 
similarity between spiritual development and physical 
development. It speaks of at least three stages in 
spiritual development which correspond to three stages 
in physical development. They are: babyhood, 
childhood, and manhood.
11

GROWING UP, SPIRITUALLY
As we look at them in just that order and notice 
subdivisions under each one, you'll find that some of 
the characteristics true of each stage of natural 
development are also true of the corresponding 
spiritual stage.
And I believe somewhere we can locate ourselves.
12
