Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
Chapter 9: 9 Be Being Filled—Speaking

Following our 1987 Campmeeting, someone asked 
me, "What did Jesus emphasize the most during His 
three-hour visitation with you?"
Without question, what Jesus emphasized most is 
what we will be discussing in this chapter.
Jesus said to me, "My plan under the New Covenant 
is for every believer to be filled with the Holy Spirit."
As we've pointed out already, every believer or 
follower of God in the Old Testament was not filled with 
the Holy Spirit. Only the prophet, priest, king, and 
those called to do a special work for God had the 
anointing of the Spirit. And that anointing only came 
upon them; it did not dwell within them. In the Old 
Testament those we would call "laymen" did not have 
the Spirit of God within them or upon them. That's one 
reason the New Covenant is a better Covenant—it 
provides a way for every person who is born again to 
have God's Spirit actually residing on the inside of 
them.
In our own individual lives, the New Testament 
emphasizes being filled with the Spirit. Jesus directed 
me to Ephesians 5:18,19 which I knew well. He 
discussed with me in detail everything I have included 
in this chapter.
In the Old Testament, God's people were strictly 
worshipping Him in the flesh. Only the king, the priest, 
and the prophet had the Holy Spirit upon them. The 
125

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
rest of them didn't have the Holy Spirit on them, or in 
them, so their display of worship was a natural display, 
done in the flesh.
However, in the New Testament, the emphasis for 
worship is that it is to be done in the Spirit. That's why 
the Bible says we are to be filled with the Spirit. Let's 
notice what Paul said, or as I like to say it, let's see 
what the Holy Spirit said through the Apostle Paul.
EPHESIANS 5:18
18 And be not drunk with wine, wherein is 
excess; but be filled with the Spirit.
This verse can be read like this: "Don't be drunk on 
wine; be drunk on the Spirit." Have you ever been 
drunk on the Spirit? You can be so filled with the Spirit 
that you stagger around like a drunk man. Be filled 
with the Spirit. Now notice what they did when they 
were filled with the Spirit: They began to speak with 
other tongues. The New Testament puts emphasis on 
being filled with the Holy Spirit and speaking with 
other tongues.
ACTS 2:1-4
1 And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, 
they were all with one accord in one place.
2 And suddenly there came a sound from heaven 
as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the 
house where they were sitting.
3 And there appeared unto them cloven tongues 
like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them.
4 And they were ALL FILLED WITH THE HOLY 
GHOST, AND BEGAN TO SPEAK with other 
tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance.
We can also see the Bible emphasis of being filled 
with the Spirit and speaking in other tongues ten years 
later. An angel appeared to Cornelius and told him to 
126

Be Being Filled—Speaking
send men to Joppa to inquire in the house of Simon the 
Tanner for Peter. Proceeding with the men to Cornelius' 
house, Peter began to preach to those gathered there.
ACTS 10:44-46
44 While Peter yet spake these words, the 
Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the 
word.
45 And they of the circumcision which 
believed were astonished ... because that 
ON THE Gentiles ALSO WAS POURED OUT 
THE GIFT OF THE HOLY GHOST.
46 FOR THEY HEARD THEM SPEAK with 
tongues, and magnify God.
We see this again in Acts chapter 19, when Paul laid 
his hands on believers in Ephesus.
ACTS 19:1-6
1 And it came to pass, that ... Paul having 
passed through the upper coasts came to 
Ephesus: and finding certain disciples,
2 He said unto them, Have ye received the 
Holy Ghost since ye believed? And they said 
... We have not so much as heard whether 
there be any Holy Ghost.
3 And he said unto them, Unto what then 
were ye baptized? And they said, Unto 
John's baptism.
4 Then said Paul, John verily baptized with 
the baptism of repentance, saying unto the 
people, that they should believe on him 
which should come after him, that is, on 
Christ Jesus.
5 When they heard this, they were baptized 
in the name of the Lord Jesus.
127

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
6 And when Paul had laid his hands upon 
them, THE HOLY GHOST CAME ON THEM; 
AND THEY SPAKE with tongues....
The Bible says that when hands were laid on these 
disciples, they spoke in other tongues. When hands are 
laid on you to receive the Holy Spirit, you can do 
something other than what the Bible says to do and it 
will grieve the Holy Spirit. The Bible says we are to 
speak in tongues.
For example, when the Holy Spirit comes upon you, 
you can just start shouting in English and not speak in 
tongues at all, and you'll shout the power off of you. 
Shouting is all right in its place, but when hands are 
laid on you to receive the Holy Spirit, that's the wrong 
time to shout. No, yield to the Holy Spirit and begin to 
speak in tongues.
In all of these New Testament accounts, the people 
spoke with tongues after the Holy Ghost came upon 
them. Did you notice that? Being filled with the Holy 
Spirit and speaking is the New Testament pattern.
EPHESIANS 5:18,19
18 And be not drunk with wine, wherein is 
excess; BUT BE FILLED WITH THE SPIRIT;
19 SPEAKING to yourselves in psalms and 
hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making 
melody in your heart to the Lord.
Notice the key words in this passage: "... be filled 
with the Spirit; speaking..." (vv. 18,19).
The Ephesians were one of the groups of people who 
had already received the initial infilling of the Holy 
Spirit under Paul's ministry (Acts 19:1-6). Yet he writes 
them in Ephesians 5:18,19, and tells them again to be 
filled with the Spirit. Why did he say that to them? 
128

Be Being Filled—Speaking
Weren't they already filled with the Holy Spirit? Before 
I comment on that, let me say this.
I've still got every Bible I ever had, and in every one 
of them, you can readily see where they are worn the 
most—over in the Epistles. Why? Those are the letters 
that were written to me! The four gospels were not 
written TO me, they were written FOR me. The Old 
Testament was not written TO me, it was written FOR 
me. Do you understand the difference?
Every single Epistle was written to you and to me! 
They're written to believers—to the Church! They're 
written to the Christian. The Epistles are where I've 
lived all these years. I want to find out what God is 
writing to the Church, and what He is saying to me! I'm 
not so concerned about what He said to the Jews. I'm 
primarily concerned about what He's saying to me!
In the Epistles, we find out that the New Testament 
emphasizes being filled with the Spirit.
In writing to the Ephesian Christians who had 
already been filled initially with the Holy Spirit in Acts 
19, Paul exhorted them again in Ephesians 5 to be 
filled with the Spirit. At first reading, this might seem 
confusing. However, what Paul had reference to in 
Ephesians 5:18 went beyond the initial infilling of the 
Holy Spirit and speaking with tongues which the 
Ephesians had received when he laid hands upon them 
in Acts 19:1-6.
Greek scholars tell us that the literal translation of 
Ephesians 5:18, "... be filled with the Spirit," actually 
contains a play on words. It literally reads, "... be 
being filled with the Spirit." Paul was encouraging 
these Ephesians to continue speaking with tongues in 
order to stay filled up with the Holy Spirit. In other 
words, they needed to have a constant infilling of the 
129

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
Spirit—a continual experience of being filled with the 
Spirit and speaking forth in supernatural utterance in 
order to stay filled with the Spirit.
I want you to notice that Paul was writing to the 
whole church at Ephesus—he wasn't writing just to 
preachers. It is God's plan for every believer, every 
Christian, living under the New Covenant to be 
continually filled with the Holy Spirit and to worship in 
the Spirit. The way we maintain a continual infilling 
and maintain our walk in the Spirit is through speaking 
divinely inspired utterances to the Lord. This is one 
form of New Testament worship.
These divinely inspired utterances can have several 
different means of expression. One means of expression 
is to magnify and worship God in other tongues, as 
we've already seen that the saints did in Acts 10:46: 
"For they heard them speak with tongues, and 
MAGNIFY God...." However, Paul went on to mention 
several other expressions in Ephesians 5:19.
Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs
Pay close attention to the following two scriptures. 
Notice how the believer's utterances inspired by the 
Holy Spirit ascend in worship "to the Lord."
EPHESIANS 5:18,19
18... but be filled with the Spirit;
19 Speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns 
and spiritual songs, SINGING AND MAKING 
MELODY IN YOUR HEART TO THE LORD.
Colossians 3:16 is a companion scripture to Ephesians 
5:18,19. It too emphasizes worship unto the Lord.
COLOSSIANS 3:16
16 Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in 
130

Be Being Filled—Speaking
all wisdom; teaching and admonishing one 
another in psalms and hymns and spiritual 
songs, SINGING WITH GRACE IN YOUR 
HEARTS TO THE LORD.
Paul was speaking to every believer when he said 
that we are to speak to ourselves in psalms, hymns, and 
spiritual songs. We are to speak to ourselves. This is 
something we are to do in our own personal, private life 
in communion with God.
A psalm is a spiritual poem or ode. It may rhyme or 
it may not; however, there is an element of poetry about 
it. It may be sung, chanted, or just recited.
The Old Testament records 150 psalms. In fact, the 
Book of Psalms was Israel's prayer and songbook. Many 
of the Psalms were written by David, who had the Holy 
Spirit upon him, and they tell us what was happening 
to him—the tests and the trials he was going through 
when that psalm was given to him. Though some were 
given to him for his own special benefit, they bless us 
because they are Spirit-anointed and because we may 
be going through a similar experience.
I speak in psalms quite frequently. A psalm may be 
sung or it may be chanted or just recited. A person 
given to music would naturally sing a psalm given by 
the Spirit. The same psalm that I would just speak out, 
someone who is given to music would sing. I'm not a 
singer; I don't have a voice for singing, so I just speak 
out the psalms the Holy Spirit gives me.
Believe it or not, I took voice lessons. Finally, the 
voice teacher said to me, "I've never said this to anyone 
in all my years of teaching, but I believe if I were you, I 
wouldn't take any more lessons." I never could get any 
higher than a certain note. Singing is not my forte; I've 
got to leave that to others. I can make a joyful noise and 
131

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
that's about it. So I speak in psalms.
Many times, God will give you a psalm in your 
private prayer life just for your own benefit. On the 
other hand, a hymn is a song of praise and worship 
addressed to and directed toward God.
A spiritual song is a song that brings forth the 
revelation of the Word that the Holy Spirit has given 
you.
"Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly ..." (Col. 
3:16). That doesn't necessarily mean just the written 
Word. They didn't have a written New Testament then. 
The Bible is talking about the Word that the Holy 
Ghost brings to you. It may be a scripture, a word of 
encouragement, or a word of exhortation, etc.
So many have read Ephesians 5:19 and Colossians 
3:16 and have tried to interpret these scriptures in the 
light of our Western culture. They have thought this 
meant singing out of a songbook, or hymnal. However, 
it couldn't mean that because when Paul wrote these 
letters, they didn't have printing presses!
And although there are many good songs which 
were probably inspired by the Holy Spirit, most songs 
in our songbooks are embalmed with unbelief.
However, psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs are 
given by the Holy Spirit—they're "hot off the wire" from 
heaven. And they are scriptural, because anything the 
Holy Ghost gives is scriptural.
Jesus called this kind of utterance, New Testament 
worship. And true worship must be "in spirit and in 
truth” (John 4:23).
Once we are initially filled with the Spirit and speak 
supernaturally, we are to continue speaking 
supernaturally.
132

Be Being Filled—Speaking
The Word of God in Ephesians 5:18,19 and 
Colossians 3:16 is talking about the supernatural 
utterance the Holy Ghost gives you on the spur of the 
moment by the spirit of prophecy. One of the 
manifestations of the Holy Spirit is prophecy (1 Cor. 
12:10).
What is prophecy?
It is inspired utterance in a known tongue. The 
simple gift of prophecy "... speaketh unto men to 
edification, and exhortation, and comfort " (1 Cor. 14:3). 
It is not to be confused with the prophet's office which 
often gives revelation of the future.
First Corinthians 14:31 says, "For ye may all 
prophesy...." In other words, all believers ought to be 
prophesying. Every single believer ought to be speaking 
to himself in psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs in his 
private devotional life.
That is part of the operation of the gift of prophecy. 
(Folks think they are not prophesying unless they get 
up in church and give a public utterance. Oh, no, that is 
just a minor part of this manifestation.)
I speak in psalms in my personal prayer life all the 
time. Many times for an hour or two in the nighttime, I 
speak to myself in psalms. Sometimes I speak to myself 
in psalms nearly all night long.
Speaking in psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs can 
also be done in public assembly if opportunity is given. 
Let's look again at Colossians 3:16:
COLOSSIANS 3:16
16 Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in 
all wisdom; TEACHING AND ADMONISHING 
ONE ANOTHER in psalms and hymns and 
spiritual songs, singing with grace in your 
133

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
hearts to the Lord.
You see, psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs can be 
used in public assembly to teach and admonish one 
another.
Now consider what Paul wrote to the church at 
Corinth. "... when ye come together [talking about a 
believers' meeting] EVERY ONE of you hath a 
psalm ..." (1 Cor. 14:26). How many of you? Every one!
The reason everyone in the Early Church could have 
a psalm when they came together was because they had 
been speaking in psalms in their own private prayer 
lives at home.
The benefits of speaking to ourselves in psalms, 
hymns, and spiritual songs are great.
First, it enables us to have true communion with 
God and to worship Him in Spirit and in truth. It is also 
a means of spiritual edification—we stay encouraged 
and built up in the Lord. Finally, it is a means of 
keeping us separated from the world. It causes us to be 
conscious of His indwelling Presence, and if we're 
conscious that He is living in us, it is bound to affect the 
way we live.
It is God's plan that we be filled with His Spirit and 
speak forth in psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs. But 
some may say, "I don't know how to do that. I've never 
done it before! How can I enter into that kind of walk in 
the Spirit?"
Stir Up the Gift
Many believers have been filled with the Holy Ghost 
and have spoken in other tongues, yet they've never 
spoken in tongues again since their initial infil ling. 
134

Be Being Filled—Speaking
They were once filled, but they've n ot maintained a 
fresh experience with God. They hav en't obeyed the 
injunction of Ephesians 5:18, "... be [being] filled with 
the Spirit."
I've had people say to me, "Well, I don't know 
whether I can speak with tongues again or not." But the 
Holy Spirit is still inside you, and He's the one who 
gives you the utterance. All you need to do is expect 
Him to give you utterance and then yield to Him. In 
other words, stir up the gift of God within you!
Notice what the Scripture says about this—not what 
man says, not what people think. Paul, in writing to 
Timothy, said:
2 TIMOTHY 1:6
6 Wherefore I put thee in remembrance that 
thou STIR UP THE GIFT OF GOD, which is in 
thee by the putting on of my hands.
What "gift" of God was Paul talking about? There is 
a twofold application of this verse. The word "gift" in 
this verse can refer to impartations by the Holy Spirit 
given when God sets people aside for service. For 
example, in Acts 13:2, the Bible says, "As they 
ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the Holy Ghost said, 
Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto 
I have called them." Something was imparted to 
Barnabas and Saul by the Holy Spirit as they were set 
apart for service.
We can also see this when Timothy was set apart for 
ministry.
1 TIMOTHY 4:14
14 Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was 
given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of 
the hands of the presbytery.
135

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
The second application of this verse is that the gift 
Timothy received when Paul laid his hands on him was 
the gift of the Holy Spirit. We know from the Scriptures 
that Paul laid his hands on many people and they 
received the Holy Spirit.
Notice what Paul said Timothy was to do with this 
gift in Second Timothy 1:6. He said, "Stir up the gift of 
God that is within you"! You are to stir up the Holy 
Spirit on the inside of you!
You can stir up the Holy Spirit yourself within your 
own spirit by praying in other tongues. After you pray 
in other tongues awhile, then you can begin to speak to 
yourself "... in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, 
singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord" 
(Eph. 5:19). That is how you enter into New Testament 
worship.
If speaking to ourselves in psalms, hymns, and 
spiritual songs is God's plan for believers living under 
the New Covenant, then should we not determine to 
pursue that plan?
I want to live a life pleasing to God; I want to flow 
with His plan—not my own. And I want to enter into 
the fullness of all that He has for me, don't you? He has 
told us how we can do it, and I, for one, intend to obey 
God!
136
