Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
Chapter 6: 6 A Change in the Order of Worship

As I stated previously, God is always moving 
forward. His plan is a progressive plan. As we study the 
Bible, we see God's plan being gradually unveiled, 
beginning in the Old Testament and increasing in 
clarity and fullness until the end of the New Testament. 
This is a truth that the majority of Bible scholars 
accept.
For example, we see types and shadows of a 
promised Redeemer throughout the Old Testament. 
However, it is not until the gospels of the New 
Testament that Jesus of Nazareth is unveiled as the 
fulfillment of those Old Testament types and shadows. 
And the fullest understanding of His death and 
resurrection is not realized until we get over into the 
Epistles.
I said all that to say this: In the visitation of July 
1987, Jesus showed me something about the 
progression of worship from the Old Testament to the 
New Testament. He directed me to John chapter 4:
JOHN 4:23,24
23 But the hour cometh, and now is, when the 
true worshippers shall worship the Father in 
spirit and in truth: for the Father seeketh such 
to worship him.
24 God is a Spirit: and they that worship him 
must worship him in spirit and in truth.
John chapter 4 relates that Jesus was passing 
87

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
through Samaria when he stopped at Jacob's well in 
Sychar. When one of the women of the city came to the 
well to draw water, Jesus asked her for a drink.
JOHN 4:9
9 Then saith the woman of Samaria unto him, 
How is it that thou, being a Jew, askest drink of 
me, which am a woman of Samaria? for the Jews 
have no dealings with the Samaritans.
Samaritans were half-breed Jews. Aside from the 
racial differences between Jews and Samaritans, there 
were differences regarding the worship of God. Both 
groups worshipped God, but they worshipped in 
different places.
In the course of Jesus' conversation with the woman 
at Sychar, she asked Him about a key issue which 
separated the Samaritans from the Jews in religious 
worship: "... Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet. Our 
fathers worshipped in this mountain; and ye say, that in 
Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship " 
(John 4:19,20).
When the woman said, " Our fathers worshipped in 
this mountain ...," she was referring to Mount Gerizim, 
a mountain significant in the worship of God 
throughout the first five books of the Old Testament. 
The Samaritans believed that Mount Gerizim was the 
proper place to worship, and this was where the 
Samaritans were worshipping during the time of Jesus' 
earthly ministry.
However, the Jews had designated Jerusalem as the 
place to worship God. This designation was made after 
the temple was built there and the Shekinah Glory of 
God appeared in the temple. It was a requirement that 
every Jewish male, thirty years and older, had to 
present himself before God at the temple in Jerusalem 
88

A Change in the Order of Worship
at least once a year. Therefore, during Jesus' earthly 
ministry the Jews went to Jerusalem to worship God.
The woman at the well, perceiving that Jesus could 
speak with authority, wanted Him to tell her where the 
proper place of worship should be. Jesus' answer 
revealed to her that neither the Samaritans nor the 
Jews were right because the order of worship was 
changing.
JOHN 4:21-24
21 Jesus saith unto her, Woman, believe me, the 
hour cometh, when ye shall neither in this 
mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the 
Father.
22 Ye worship ye know not what: we know what 
we worship: for salvation is of the Jews.
23 But the hour cometh, and now is, when the 
true worshippers shall worship the Father in 
spirit and in truth: for the Father seeketh such 
to worship him.
24 God is a Spirit: and they that worship him 
must worship him in spirit and in truth.
Jesus said to me in the visitation, "Really, in so 
many words, she asked me, 'Who is right? The 
Samaritans or the Jews?' And in so many words, I 
answered her, 'Neither is right. Because the time is 
coming and now is, that they that worship God must 
worship Him in Spirit and in truth.'"
The time had not been right to worship in Spirit and 
in truth before the ministry of Jesus. In fact, the Old 
Testament saints couldn't worship God in Spirit 
because they didn't know the Spirit of God as we do. 
Only the king, the priest, the prophet, or someone 
especially called by God to perform a certain task, had 
the Presence of God upon them or with them. The 
89

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
prophet, priest, and king had an anointing from God 
that came upon them to stand in those offices. Anytime 
God called someone else to do a certain work, an 
anointing of the Spirit came upon them to perform that 
task. None of those we might term "the laity" had the 
Spirit of God upon them or in them. And not one of the 
anointings in the Old Testament was the same thing 
that occurs under the New Testament when people are 
born again and have the Spirit of God dwelling on the 
inside of them.
In the Old Testament, those who believed in God did 
not have God's Presence abiding within them. That is 
why they had to present themselves in Jerusalem 
where God's Presence was. The temple in Jerusalem 
was God's house where His Presence dwelled. But in 
the New Testament, we are God's house: believers are 
the temple of God. God's Spirit lives in us individually, 
and He lives in the Body of Christ collectively!
Jesus pointed the Samaritan woman to a new time
—to a new age in the order of worship. It would be an 
age where saints would be able to worship God in Spirit 
and in truth because the Spirit of God would be living 
on the inside of them! Jesus Himself was ushering in 
that new order of worship.
By His reply, Jesus indicated to the woman that 
because of what God was wanting to do in that hour, He 
was not putting His approval on the way either Jews or 
Samaritans worshipped God. Spiritually speaking, the 
time had come for a change in the way God's people 
worshipped Him. It was time for the way man 
worshipped God to change from Old Covenant to New 
Covenant. Jesus was ushering in a New Covenant and a 
new way of worship. The time had come for man to be 
indwelled by the Holy Spirit so he could worship God in 
90

A Change in the Order of Worship
the Spirit.
Even in natural life, there comes a time when things 
change. In your own life, weren't there times when 
things changed for you? For example, when you got 
married, didn't things change in your life? When your 
first child was born, things changed, didn't they? There 
comes a time for change, both in the natural realm and 
in the spiritual realm. Certainly a change as dramatic 
as the change between the Old Covenant and the New 
Covenant would affect the way man related to and 
worshipped God.
Jesus said to the woman, "... the TRUE 
WORSHIPPERS shall worship the Father in spirit and in 
truth: for the Father seeketh such to worship him" (John 
4:23). What God is seeking in the dispensation of the New 
Testament is true worshippers.
We can't go back to the Old Testament and worship 
God like they did and be true worshippers. We can't go 
back to the Old Testament and carry on our services 
like they did and be true worshippers. No, Jesus said, 
"... the hour cometh, and now is, when the true 
worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in 
truth ..." (v. 23).
Yes, people in the Old Testament worshipped God in 
all the fullness they could under the Old Covenant, but 
we have a New Covenant—we can worship God in 
Spirit and in truth!
You find expressions in the Old Testament where 
people worshipped before the Lord and worshipped with 
all their might. That's because their worship was in the 
flesh only—they didn't have the Spirit. They couldn't 
worship in the Spirit or in the Lord; they could only 
worship before the Lord. They couldn't worship in the 
power and might of the Holy Spirit; they could only 
91

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
Worship with all their might. In order to be a true 
worshipper of God who is a Spirit, we must worship in 
the Spirit!
Under the New Covenant, everything we do in 
worship must be in the Spirit. We should not try to go 
back under the Old Covenant and worship like they did. 
People under the Old Covenant were spiritually dead—
they had not been born again. The salvation of the Old 
Testament saints was not complete until Jesus' death, 
burial, and resurrection. We who are born again should 
worship as those who are alive unto God! We should 
worship in the power of His Spirit!
"You won't worship God like your forefathers did in 
this mountain," is what Jesus was saying to the woman 
at the well. "And neither will you worship Him like the 
Jews have worshipped Him heretofore in Jerusalem. 
Now, the true worshippers shall worship the Father in 
Spirit and in truth."
The order of worship has changed from the Old 
Covenant to the New Covenant. In order to be true 
worshippers living under the New Covenant, we must 
follow the New Covenant order of worshipping in the 
Spirit.
92
