Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
Chapter 4: 4 What's Your Purpose?

"Even when men get My plan," Jesus said to me in 
that early morning visitation of 1987, "oftentimes their 
purposes are wrong.
"Some people get My plan," Jesus said. "I speak to 
them, but in trying to carry out that plan, their 
purposes become wrong. So I cannot bless them because 
man's purposes and pursuits must be lined up with My 
plans and purposes for the fullness of My blessing."
You can have the right plan with the wrong purpose.
Even in our individual church services and 
meetings, we can miss God's purpose and fall far short 
of His best. As I was caught up in the Spirit with Jesus, 
He told me that He has a plan and a purpose for every 
meeting.
"When it comes to having church, when it comes to 
services, when it comes to meetings," Jesus said, "men 
make their own plans and then ask Me to bless their 
plans. I bless them as far as I can, but I cannot put My 
full approval and blessing upon them because men are 
pursuing their own plans."
Then He spoke to me about the different kinds of 
meetings—believers' meetings, evangelistic meetings, 
healing meetings, teaching meetings, prayer meetings, 
worship services, and so forth.
He said, "Where you are missing it today in your 
culture in the United States is, you try to put all those 
kinds of meetings into one service, and so you never 
51

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
really reach the full potential of any meeting."
Sometimes in a campmeeting-type of setting, we 
have the time to combine many different kinds of 
services.
However, people in a church setting often try to 
have constant campmeeting, or all crusade-type 
services. You can't have campmeeting all the time. In 
order for people to get a balanced spiritual diet, they 
need all kinds of meetings. When we try to have all 
kinds of meetings in one, none of them are as successful 
as they should be. Then the Holy Spirit is hindered 
from moving like He wants to move because man is 
operating according to his own purpose and not 
according to God's purpose. Although His power will be 
in manifestation as much as possible under the 
circumstances, it won't be all that God has in store for 
us.
But if we'll learn God's purpose for each meeting 
and emphasize that, we'll have success in every meeting 
we hold. I'm reciting to you things that the Lord said to 
me during this visitation. I don't know about you, but 
some of the things He said to me corrected my thinking.
Believers' Meetings
One kind of meeting that we don't see much in the 
local church is a believers' meeting. People in the Early 
Church went to church because they had something. 
Today, most people go to church to get something. Well, 
if you have to go to church to get something, that's fine. 
But, really, Christians ought to bring something with 
them when they come to church.
We find believers' meetings specifically mentioned 
in scripture:
52

What's Your Purpose?
1 CORINTHIANS 14:26-29
26 How is it then, brethren? when ye come 
together, every one of you hath a psalm, hath a 
doctrine, hath a tongue, hath a revelation, hath 
an interpretation. Let all things be done unto 
edifying.
27 If any man speak in an unknown tongue, let 
it be by two, or at the most by three, and that by 
course; and let one interpret.
28 But if there be no interpreter, let him keep 
silence in the church; and let him speak to 
himself, and to God.
 Let the prophets speak two or three, and let the 
other judge.
This is not talking about just any kind of service. It 
is talking about a believers' meeting. Nobody is present 
but believers. "... Brethren ... when ye come together. .." 
(v. 26).
First Corinthians 14:23-25, makes this plain:
1 CORINTHIANS 14:23-25
23 If therefore the whole church be come 
together into one place, and all speak with 
tongues, and there come in those that are 
unlearned, or unbelievers, will they not say that 
ye are mad?
24 But if all prophesy, and there come in one 
that believeth not, or one unlearned, he is 
convinced of all, he is judged of all:
25 And thus are the secrets of his heart made 
manifest; and so falling down on his face he will 
worship God, and report that God is in you of a 
truth.
Here, in this passage, believers have come together. 
The unbeliever might or might not come in. If he does, 
the manifestation of God's Presence in the church is to 
53

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
be so great that he will fall down before Him.
The closest thing I ever saw to this kind of meeting 
was in 1939 and 1940 in a little church I pastored in 
Farmersville, Texas.
This congregation was Pentecostal. As their young 
pastor, I had recently come into Pentecost from the 
Baptists.
I would say that in 1939 and 1940, I probably didn't 
preach more than a half a dozen times on a Sunday 
morning; we had believers' meetings.
I came into Pentecost in 1939 and in those days, 
people thought you were backslidden if you didn't have 
a testimony meeting every service. We had a move of 
the Spirit in those days that the modern-day 
Charismatic knows nothing about. But we've got to get 
back to it.
In this church, primarily only our own people—
believers—came on Sunday morning. Ordinarily, I'd 
just sit down on the platform and say to the 
congregation, "I'm going to turn this meeting over to the 
Holy Spirit. Whatever the Holy Spirit has given you, 
just get up and give it." Of course, if the meeting didn't 
run right, I was still responsible for it, and I'd get up 
and stop it or get it back into the right channel.
First Corinthians 14:26 says, "... when ye come 
together, every one of you hath a psalm ... doctrine ... 
tongue ... revelation ... interpretation. Let all things be 
done unto edifying." How many believers are supposed 
to have something from the Holy Spirit? All of them! Of 
course, this will work better in a small church than it 
will in a large one. "... EVERY ONE of you hath a 
psalm, hath a doctrine, hath a tongue, hath a 
revelation, hath an interpretation. Let all things be done 
54

What's Your Purpose?
unto edifying" (v. 26).
I would tell my congregation, "Whatever the Holy 
Spirit has given you—give it. If the Holy Spirit has 
given you a song, just start a chorus. If the Holy Spirit 
has given you tongues for the whole body, speak it out. 
If the Holy Spirit gives you the interpretation, go ahead 
and interpret. If you have a prophecy, prophesy. 
Whatever the Holy Spirit gives you—give it."
Remember, prophecy is inspired utterance. Because 
prophecy is speaking forth, there is an element of 
prophecy in testimonies. In these believers' meetings, 
people would get up and testify, and although they 
would sometimes start off speaking in the natural, 
they'd get inspired and their testimony would bless 
everyone. As they spoke, something would just go out 
over the whole crowd.
For instance, there was a man in the congregation 
who was very timid. Sometimes the Spirit of God would 
come upon him and with no music and no singing, he'd 
just get up and start dancing. You talk about dancing! 
It blessed everyone. And with no music! All we had was 
a piano in those days. Someone would start singing a 
chorus and the pianist would pick it up and start 
playing along.
We had three sections of seats in our little 
auditorium. There would be times when the whole 
congregation just sat quietly, reverencing and waiting 
on God. Sometimes the Spirit of God would move in 
such a way that with no pianist or any music at all, the 
people in one section would simultaneously jump up 
and start dancing all at once just like someone was 
leading them! There was no music and there was no one 
leading them, but they'd all start dancing just like some 
Unseen One was orchestrating them.
55

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
I'd sit on the platform, grinning and watching the 
Holy Spirit move. Then they'd all stop simultaneously 
and another section would get up and they'd start 
dancing with no one directing them. Then they'd all sit 
down again just like some Unseen One was directing 
them. The Holy Spirit was doing the directing! Then the 
people in the center section would all jump up and 
dance for a while and they'd all sit down at the same 
time. Sometimes, someone would get up and give a 
message in tongues. Most of the time, I'd interpret 
because I was on the platform and people could hear 
better that way. Once in a while, I'd encourage someone 
else to interpret the message.
God moved in some of the most unusual ways in 
those believers' meetings. But it was because we had 
real worship in our services—true worship. And we 
were careful to keep our worship in the Spirit and to 
reverence God and not get in the flesh. We didn't put on 
some kind of a demonstration, but there was a 
demonstration of the Spirit —there is a difference! We 
are not to put on a demonstration, but we are to allow 
the demonstration of the Spirit. Do you see the 
difference?
None of the services were alike. In some services, 
the Holy Ghost so came into the room and filled it with 
His Presence that nobody moved, nobody said a word. 
You were afraid to move or speak because a holy awe 
gripped the crowd.
We had no nursery. The babies were in their 
mothers' arms or asleep on the floor or on a bench. 
Little children were sitting by their mothers. Yet as we 
sat in total silence for an hour and a half, not a baby 
cried, not a child moved.
The Presence of God filled His temple. Ohhh! You 
56

What's Your Purpose?
carry that Presence with you for months and months.
Once in a while some unsaved person would come 
in. I remember one of those times. We were all sitting 
silently in God's Presence, when from the platform, I 
saw the back door of the auditorium open and a man 
come inside.
This fellow usually dropped his wife off at church on 
Sunday morning. Then he would go to an illegal 
gambling dive in town. He would come back around 
noon to pick up his wife because we were usually 
through by that time.
He told us later what transpired that day. He drove 
into the parking lot, rolled down the car window, and 
didn't hear anything. So he got out of the car and 
walked up to a window. We didn't have stained glass—
we just painted the bottom pane of glass. He couldn't 
see inside, so he put his ear up against the window, but 
he couldn't hear anything.
He said, "I thought, Perhaps the rapture has taken 
place and everyone is gone! The cars are all here."
He went back and sat in his car. An hour went by. It 
was one o'clock by that time and he hadn't heard 
anything.
We were all sitting in the Presence of God, almost 
afraid to move. We were engulfed in a holy awe, a holy 
atmosphere.
So he decided, I'll just look inside to see if the 
rapture took place. He'd been to church some and had 
heard preaching about the rapture, and his wife had 
also talked to him about it.
Sitting on the platform, I was the only person who 
saw him open the door and look around.
57

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
The building was about half full with most of the 
crowd sitting down toward the front. The back pews 
were empty, so he sat down on the very back pew as 
close as he could to the door.
Nobody said a word, not a child moved, not a baby 
cried—and we'd been there two hours! This move of the 
Spirit started just a little past 11:00 a.m. and when this 
occurred it was about 1:15 p.m.
Fifteen more minutes went by. I watched the man 
as he was looking around all that time. Suddenly, he 
started shaking violently. He got up and staggered 
down the aisle like a drunk man, shaking all the while, 
and fell across the altar calling on God.
No one went to the altar to help him pray. We all 
just sat there. We figured that what God had started in 
him, He was able to complete.
That didn't happen just once—it happened 
frequently. Almost every time an unsaved person would 
come in on Sunday morning, it would happen to them. 
They'd start shaking as though they had a chill. No one 
would say anything to them, but they would get up and 
come to the altar as the power of God came upon them.
We don't know too much today about the power of 
God in manifestation. Oh, we see the gifts of the Spirit 
operate sometimes, but God wants us to have all of it. 
He wants us to have His full plan.
The Lord talked to me about the manifestation of 
His power in the visitation in July. He talked about 
different kinds of meetings which Christians hold. He 
specifically mentioned believers' meetings.
If I were a pastor again, at certain times I'd have 
believers' meetings. These meetings would not be for 
the general public. Things can happen when just 
58

What's Your Purpose?
believers are present that should not happen in a 
meeting open to the general public. But if anyone else 
happened to come in, they would get saved just as they 
did in Farmersville, and they would encounter the 
Presence of God just as First Corinthians 14 says.
Evangelistic Meetings
We called our Sunday morning services in 
Farmersville, believers' meetings, because no one came 
except Christians.
On Sunday nights, though, visitors came and filled 
up the building. They even stood outside looking in the 
doors! We'd have more sinners than saints at those 
Sunday night meetings.
I would say to our congregation ahead of time, 
"We're coming tonight with the sinner in mind. We're 
not coming to worship God or to get blessed ourselves. 
We got blessed this morning. This isn't a believers' 
meeting. Some things which happened this morning 
would be out of order tonight. This is an evangelistic 
meeting. We're not interested in jumping and shouting, 
but we're interested in helping that unsaved one along."
We had good music on Sunday nights. Everyone 
appreciates good singing. There were solos, trios, and 
quartets.
People often told us, "You have the best singing in 
town." You see, they recognized the Holy Ghost 
anointing.
I preached an evangelistic message, and people were 
saved, filled with the Holy Ghost, and healed every 
Sunday night. It was just a common occurrence; we had 
constant revival.
59

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
People coming in from the outside, even sinners, 
would tell us, "When you step in the door here, you can 
sense the Presence of God."
You see, we had charged the atmosphere with the 
power of God that morning in the believers' meeting.
Prayer Meetings
We desperately need to get back to holding prayer 
meetings in our churches. Most of what people call 
prayer meetings today have deteriorated into little or no 
praying. What does "prayer meeting" mean? It means 
you meet to pray. If you're going to call it a prayer 
meeting, then that is the purpose of it. You should 
devote the major portion of time to prayer.
I remember some time ago, a woman asked me if 
she could talk to me after one of our seminars. She said, 
"Maybe you can help me. I belong to a church and we 
have a weekly prayer meeting. But I don't know why in 
the world they call it a prayer meeting, because we very 
seldom ever pray."
If people don't pray in a prayer meeting, they have 
their plans and purposes all mixed up! She said, 
"Instead of calling it a 'prayer' meeting, it should be 
called a 'prophesying' meeting because all they ever do 
is prophesy over one another. Is that right?"
I said, "What do you mean, Is that right?"
"Well, for instance, they are always prophesying 
something bad to me."
I asked her, "What have they prophesied over you?"
"About eighteen months ago, they prophesied that 
my mother was going to die within twelve months."
"Did she die?"
60

What's Your Purpose?
"No, she's in good health."
I said, "It's easy to judge that." Anyone with one eye 
and half sense could tell that prophecy wasn't from God, 
especially since her mother was still alive and well!
"Then they prophesied that my husband was going 
to leave me within six months," she said.
"Did he leave you?"
"No, he didn't leave me. He doesn't understand 
everything that's going on, but he is a wonderful man 
and I love him and he loves me."
I said, "Well, that ought to be easily judged too."
If folks are having a prayer meeting, I don't know 
why they don't pray! I realize that it's good to sing a 
little at first to sort of get "tuned up." It helps to sing 
and worship God to get into an attitude of prayer. But 
in a prayer meeting, if all you're going to do is sing then 
you're going to miss out on God's plan and purpose for 
that meeting.
Not only do we need to hold meetings for the 
purpose of prayer, but everyone at the meeting needs to 
have a clear understanding of what to pray about.
I remember something I did in my ministry after I 
left my last church in 1949 and went out on the field. I 
was preaching primarily in Full Gospel churches, and it 
was the custom in those days in Full Gospel churches to 
close every meeting with the congregation coming 
around the altar to pray. I'll tell you, we need some more 
of those kind of services today! It would stop ninety-
nine percent of all counseling in the church; people 
would get the answers to their problems while they are 
praying!
I'd purposely run polls on these people who came to 
61

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
the altar. I'd go along and tap them on the shoulder, 
and ask them, "What are you doing here at the altar?"
"Oh, just praying."
"What are you praying for?"
"I don't know."
If people don't know what they are praying for, how 
will they know if they get the answer? Yes, there is the 
kind of prayer where we are just waiting on God. But if 
that's what they were doing, they should have 
answered, I'm not praying for anything specific; I'm just 
fellowshipping with my Father."
Since these people really didn't know what they 
were doing at the altar, their purposes were wrong and 
they didn't even know it. When man's purposes are 
wrong, the blessings of God can only flow so far. God's 
blessings and His stamp of approval can only be given 
in a limited way when we are not in line with His plan. 
Get God's plan! It's best!
So if it is important for individuals to know what 
they are praying for, how much more important it is 
that we have a purpose in mind when we meet as a 
church to pray!
I saw tremendous results in my own ministry as a 
pastor when my church got in one accord and had the 
same purpose in prayer. Let me share with you one 
such instance.
The last church I pastored grew continually. That's 
the way it should be with every church. We should be 
continually following God's plan, and reaching forth 
towards that. This is the Biblical pattern for growth 
whether it is for a church or for an individual.
The reason we were always growing in this church 
62

What's Your Purpose?
was because we were continually trying to follow after 
God's plan and to pursue that. For example, we were 
going to hold a revival—so the purpose of the meeting 
was evangelistic—to bring in the lost and get them 
saved. In our church, we'd always had certain fast days 
and prayer meetings set aside to prepare for special 
meetings like this. Actually, we were just copying after 
what others had done more than anything else. If we're 
not careful, we can get in a habit of doing things that 
may be right, but we're doing them just as a religious 
rite. If that's all it is, it won't produce any results or 
amount to much.
Because I saw that we were just more or less 
following a religious form, I said to the congregation, "I 
don't want you to even pray about the revival that's 
coming up." I did that to get the people out of their 
religious rut.
We were getting ready to hold an evangelistic 
meeting, a revival—that was our main purpose. We 
were not going to come to worship God, to have a 
believers' meeting, or even to get blessed ourselves. We 
were coming for one reason only, and that was to get 
the lost saved.
I told the congregation, "When you come tomorrow 
night for prayer meeting, write down on a piece of paper 
the name of someone you want to see saved during this 
revival meeting. If it is a husband and wife, write both 
of their names down. If the person is a backslider or if 
both a husband and a wife are backsliders, write down 
their names. Write a 'B' on the paper so we will know 
they're backsliders. You pray a little differently for a 
backslider than you do for a person who has never been 
born again."
Ordinarily, it doesn't happen in East Texas, but the 
63

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
next night we had a cold spell and it snowed and 
sleeted. People in Texas aren't used to that kind of 
weather, so they don't go out in it. We didn't have as 
many people come to prayer meeting as we normally 
did, but some people did come. I collected all of the 
pieces of paper with the names written down. I said, 
"First, let's pray according to the Word of God; after all, 
it's God's plan that sinners be saved."
We didn't have any music, singing, or worship 
because that wasn't the purpose of this meeting; it was 
to pray. So I said to the congregation, "Let's agree that 
these people will have a revelation of Jesus as Savior 
during this revival meeting. The Bible says, “'... if two of 
you shall agree on earth as touching any thing that they 
shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which 
is in heaven'" (Matt. 18:19).
We prayed for every name on that list; some of them 
we agreed on and some we prayed as the Spirit would 
direct us, and for some we prayed in tongues. After we 
prayed in agreement and claimed our answer, I said, 
"Now let's thank God for the answer. Once we thank 
God for the answer, don't pray about this again. If you 
think about it, just lift your hands and praise God for 
the answer."
Following God's plan, we got one hundred percent 
results! We knew exactly what kind of meeting we were 
having and we just pursued that! Everyone we prayed 
for except two were saved in that revived meeting! The 
other two were saved before the end of the year!
I left that church before the year was up and there 
was only one man we'd prayed for who had not been 
saved yet. However, before the year was over, I was 
preaching in California, and this man and his wife came 
up to talk to me after a meeting. They had moved out 
64

What's Your Purpose?
there, and he told me, "Brother Hagin, I want you to 
know that I'm your brother now. I've been born again!" 
That means before that year was over, we had one 
hundred percent success praying according to God's 
plan! I'd never heard of a prayer meeting that had those 
kinds of results. But, you see, we got in line with God's 
plan!
Unfortunately, not every pastor is willing to pay the 
price to have the right kind of prayer meetings in his 
church. I was holding a meeting for a pastor once, and 
he asked me, "Brother Hagin, how can I get my 
congregation to pray?"
I never did have any problem getting my people to 
pray. I said, "You pray yourself. You set the example for 
them."
"Oh," he said. He turned around and walked off. He 
was too busy doing other things to pray much. That's 
sort of like parents telling their children, "You shouldn't 
do that," when they do it right in front of their children 
themselves! Children will do just what the parents do, 
and act just like their own parents act.
Prayer is God's plan.
But men look for some human plan, some human 
formula, some "get-fixed-quick" scheme.
God hasn't got any "get-fixed-quick" plans. The new 
birth is instant, but spiritual growth is not. Spiritual 
development takes time.
We live in a time of fast food. All you need to do is to 
drive up to the window and get it. We live in a time of 
ninety-nine cent sales. But God is not putting on any 
ninety-nine cent sales. The things of God still cost the 
same price they did years ago. They never go up in price 
and never go down in value.
65

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
Pastors, get God's plan. Get down on your knees and 
stay there until you find out what His purpose is for 
your life and ministry.
Pastors are responsible to be the example for their 
flock to follow, and they are responsible for taking the 
time to prepare themselves so they can follow the move 
of God's Spirit. What often happens to some pastors is 
that when God does begin to move in their churches, 
they draw back from the supernatural instead of 
guiding it correctly and finding out what God's plan and 
purpose is for their church. Failing to follow God's plan 
and to move with Him kills the move of the Spirit. Then 
the church gets dry, dead, and dull, and splits in three 
or four different directions.
Some pastors are afraid to follow the move of God's 
Spirit. They say, "I'm afraid of fanaticism and wildfire." 
You know, if things get out of order, I've said for years, 
"If there is wildfire in the church, don't bother about 
that; there are enough wet blankets around to put it 
out." Most of those folks complaining about wildfire 
haven't got any fire at all! I agree with a statement I 
once heard another minister say, "I'd rather have a 
little wildfire and God moving, than have no fire at all 
and the order of a graveyard."
If you're a pastor, what are you going to do if a 
prayer group gets out of order? You need to do exactly 
what I did. I took charge personally and began to direct 
them rightly. We channeled that power in the right 
direction. You talk about miracles! We had miracles 
every week in our church. People were saved, filled with 
the Holy Spirit, healed, and the miraculous was almost 
a common occurrence to us.
Even outsiders would call us for prayer. My wife and 
I would pray for people who were not even members of 
66

What's Your Purpose?
our church and who had never heard us preach one 
sermon! Yet, they'd come to us and say, "Sister So-and-
so told me how God uses you, so I thought if you would 
pray, I would be healed." God healed them every time! 
The reason God was using me like this, and the reason 
we had the miraculous operating in our midst wasn't so 
much because of me. It was that prayer group who was 
backing me in prayer!
Really, I didn't know much back then. It's a wonder 
some of the deacons didn't have to tell me to get in out 
of the rain! But, you see, I was backed by a prayer 
group that knew how to pray.
Pastors, don't back away from intercessory prayer 
groups. Be there yourself and direct them. "Well, I don't 
know how." That's where the problem is. Find out how 
to lead people in prayer, but don't back off from this 
area. If you are going to have the miraculous operating 
in your church, you are going to have to have people 
praying. And you are going to have to pray yourself.
Let's get God's plan on the matter! We see this kind 
of prayer as God's plan in Acts chapter 4. You 
remember the story: In Acts chapter 3, the man at the 
Gate called Beautiful was healed. Peter and John were 
arrested for questioning and were commanded not to 
preach or teach in the Name of Jesus.
ACTS 4:23,24
23 And being let go, they [Peter and John] went 
TO THEIR OWN COMPANY, and reported all 
that the chief priests and elders had said unto 
them.
24 And when they heard that, THEY [the whole 
company] lifted up their voice to God with one 
accord [they prayed], and said, Lord, thou art 
God....
67

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
First, notice verse 23. When you get into trouble, it 
is good to know what to do, isn't it? Go to people who 
know how to pray. There's truth to the saying, "Birds of 
a feather, flock together."
When Peter and John got into trouble, did they say, 
"Man, we're in trouble! Dear Lord, we'd better get a 
committee together and go talk to the chief priests and 
elders and see if we can't work this thing out"? No, they 
went to those who knew how to pray! There is power in 
united prayer!
Then in verse 24, it says, "... they lifted up their 
voice to God with one accord ...." That doesn't mean 
every one of them said the same thing to God in prayer. 
The Bible is saying that this is the Holy Spirit 
interpreting their prayer—this is the essence of what 
they were all praying in one accord. Everyone didn't say 
the same words by rote, but that is what they were all 
saying in effect in the Spirit, and that is the way God 
heard it.
The disciples didn't begin their prayer by talking 
about the problem. They didn't put the problem first—
they put God first. They didn't start praying about the 
mess they were in and what a fix they were in because 
Peter and John had gotten arrested.
"We may all wind up in jail! Oh my, my, my, what 
are we going to do now? Momma told me I shouldn't get 
involved with that bunch. If only I'd listened to 
Momma!"
Is that what the disciples said? No, no, no, no!
They said, "... Lord, THOU ART GOD ..." (v. 24). 
Aren't you glad He's God? No matter what happens, He 
is still God! No matter how dark it looks or what kind of 
mess it looks like you're in, God is still God!
68

What's Your Purpose?
ACTS 4:23-31
23 And being let go, they went to their own 
company, and reported all that the chief priests 
and elders had said unto them.
24 And when they heard that, they lifted up 
their voice to God with one accord, and said, 
Lord, thou art God, which hast made heaven, 
and earth, and the sea, and all that in them is:
25 Who by the mouth of thy servant David hast 
said, Why did the heathen rage, and the people 
imagine vain things?
26 The kings of the earth stood up, and the 
rulers were gathered together against the Lord, 
and against his Christ.
27 For of a truth against thy holy child Jesus, 
whom thou hast anointed, both Herod, and 
Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people 
of Israel, were gathered together.
28 For to do whatsoever thy hand and thy 
counsel determined before to be done.
29 And now, Lord, behold their threatenings: 
and grant unto thy servants, that WITH ALL 
BOLDNESS they may speak THY WORD. (That 
kind of praying brings results! They didn't pray, 
"Lord, grant that we'll be able to make an agreeable 
compromise with them." No! No!)
30 By stretching forth thine hand to heal; and 
that signs and wonders may be done by the 
name of thy holy child Jesus.
31 And when they had prayed, the place was 
shaken where they were assembled together; 
and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and 
they spake the word of God with boldness.
Some people get excited when the power of God 
comes on people, and they shake or fall under the 
power. You wait until the building starts shaking—then 
they will really get excited!
69

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
In Acts 5, we find the answer to their prayer.
ACTS 5:12-16
12 And by the hands of the apostles [remember 
they prayed for signs and wonders] were many 
signs and wonders wrought among the people; 
(and they were all with one accord in Solomon's 
porch.
13 And of the rest durst no man join himself to 
them: but the people magnified them.
14 And believers were the more added to the 
Lord, multitudes both of men and women.)
15 Insomuch that they brought forth the sick 
into the streets, and laid them on beds and 
couches, that at the least the shadow of Peter 
passing by might overshadow some of them.
16 There came also a multitude out of the cities 
round about unto Jerusalem, bringing sick 
folks, and them which were vexed with unclean 
spirits: and they were HEALED every one.
Isn't that strange? Sick folks who were vexed with 
unclean spirits. "I thought all spirits had to be cast 
out?" No, they were healed every one. Glory to God, 
everyone that Peter's shadow fell on, was healed. God is 
God! And He always will be! He's still GOD! He still 
works the same way now that He did here with the 
Early Church.
Why is it so important that we have the proper kind 
of prayer meetings in our churches? Because there's a 
move of God on! God is wanting to restore the 
supernatural operations of His Spirit in our local 
churches. Actually, He began to start a wave of 
intercessory prayer a few years ago, but some people 
became misguided and thwarted it.
Hear me carefully, now. Back in the beginning of the 
'80s, we changed some things as far as the government 
70

What's Your Purpose?
was concerned through intercession and we got some 
right people into office. But then the Body of Christ let 
up on that prayer, and some people went to the extreme 
and got into the ditch on intercession. It hindered the 
true move of God and it made people draw back from 
entering into the intercession that God wanted for the 
Body of Christ. In fact, some churches split over the 
issue of intercession.
One pastor in California told me his church split 
three ways, because some of his intercessors got the 
"revelation" that God was through with him at that 
church and that he was supposed to leave. He hadn't 
heard God tell him to leave. A third of the church 
stayed with him, but it split the church wide open.
You can readily see why this pastor was not very 
interested in any kind of intercessory prayer, because 
the intercessors are the ones who messed him up. They 
divided the church. Actually, no group of intercessors 
should be praying by themselves, unless they have some 
mature person over them who understands the move of 
God's Spirit. Otherwise, they will get off every time. 
They fail to realize that when the Holy Spirit is moving 
the most—that is exactly when Satan gets in.
I'm saying this to you because the Lord has said to 
me that unless Christians turn situations around in our 
nation, and get the right people in office in the next 
election—in just a matter of two to three years—our 
living standard will be half of what it is right now 
because of the economic conditions.
We can change that by prayer! There is a work to be 
done in the earth and there is a harvest to be reaped. 
There is a wave of revival and glory that is coming not 
just here in the United States, but across the world! 
And the devil is not going to stop it!
71

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
So let's get in tune with the purpose of God and 
restore prayer meetings in our churches to what He 
intends for them to be. We'll see powerful results when 
we do!
Teaching Meetings
God also wants us to have teaching meetings in our 
churches where the primary purpose is just to teach the 
people. In such services, we need to keep singing at a 
minimum. Remember, it is not a worship service, 
although there should also be times when we meet just 
to worship God. But in a teaching meeting, we should 
endeavor to turn the service right over to the speaker, 
because the purpose of the meeting is primarily to teach
—to impart truth from God's Word. When we pursue 
God's purpose in spiritual matters—then we know what 
to do in each service.
Pastors and all ministers should ask themselves this 
question: What is the purpose of this meeting? What is 
God's plan?
You see, it's not a matter of just "having church." 
We've got to have God's plan and pursue it with His 
purpose in mind. This means we may have to spend 
time waiting upon Him to get His plan and purpose.
Once we understand what He wants us to do, we 
must flow with Him in the outworking of each service.
His Purpose or Ours?
I remember one particular Mother's Day when I was 
pastoring the church in Farmersville, Texas. I had 
worked hard on a Mother's Day sermon that year. I 
mean I worked on it for days. I had quotes of great and 
famous men of old—I quoted Benjamin Franklin and 
72

What's Your Purpose?
Abraham Lincoln and men like that. I had all my notes 
and I worked hard on them. When I was finally 
finished, I knew that sermon was a good one!
There were four other churches a few miles away 
that were putting together a special afternoon meeting 
on Mother's Day. They wanted me to come and preach. 
Because of that, I missed my morning service, so I told 
my congregation we'd have our Mother's Day service on 
Sunday night instead of on Sunday morning.
When I preached that sermon in the afternoon for 
these other chinches, I knew it was good because 
everyone just bragged on it! So I thought, I'm going to 
preach that Sunday night in my church.
I planned my evening service so that everything was 
about "Mother." There were special songs all about 
Mother. There was a ladies trio singing about Mother. 
However, the whole time that the ladies trio was 
singing, I didn't hear one word they sang because the 
Lord was dealing with me. There was an argument 
going on between my heart and my head.
The Lord said to me, "Have a healing service right 
now. Just as soon as they finish that song, get up and 
announce a healing service."
"Why, Lord," I said, "You're going to ruin my good 
sermon. Lord, I worked on this thing for days and 
weeks. I can't preach a Mother's Day sermon next 
Sunday—it won't be Mother's Day. The people would 
think I was crazy! I'll have to wait a whole year before I 
can preach my sermon." My sermon!
The Lord said again to me, "Pray for the sick just as 
soon as the singers finish singing."
I said again, "Lord, the people will think I'm crazy." 
I looked over the crowd. In the Mother's Day program, 
73

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
we were going to have some of the younger children 
come to the platform to do some recitations, and their 
fathers had come to see their children perform. I knew 
some of those men wouldn't be back in church again 
until the Christmas program!
So I said to the Lord, "Lord, those men will think 
I'm crazy. I mean, we have everything planned to focus 
on 'Mother.' I've got this Mother's Day sermon, and it's 
a good one too. It's all about 'Mother' in the Bible. This 
crowd will think I'm crazy getting up here announcing a 
healing meeting and praying for the sick. Nothing is 
going in that direction, Lord! Everything is directed 
toward 'Mother.'"
The Lord said again, "Pray for the sick. Minister to 
the sick."
After that ladies trio finished their song, I got up 
and opened my Bible. I even began reading my text on 
"Mother." Finally, I just closed my Bible and said, "I'm 
going to obey God. God said, 'Minister to the sick.'"
I remember in that service there was one fellow who 
would frequently come by our parsonage. Actually, he 
would cut through the yard between our parsonage and 
the church to go to a store up the street.
I don't know what had happened to him, but 
somehow he had injured his back in such a way that he 
walked stooped over. He couldn't straighten up and 
walk normally. When I announced the healing service, 
he came forward for prayer. I laid hands on him and the 
power of God hit him and instantly straightened his 
back and he stood up straight! He was an older man, 
but after God healed him he could twist around, bend 
over, and even touch the floor. He went through all 
kinds of gymnastics right in front of everyone. In that 
service, a little baby was also miraculously healed. I 
74

What's Your Purpose?
looked back in the congregation to the men I thought 
would think I was crazy for having a healing meeting, 
and they were all crying. They were wiping tears from 
their eyes!
You see, when we pursue God's purpose rather than 
our own, the Holy Spirit is free to move in our midst. 
He can accomplish more in five minutes than we could 
accomplish in five years!
Right Purpose, Right Motive
Another important aspect of pursuing God's purpose 
has to do with our attitudes and motives. Did you know 
you can have the right purpose with the wrong motive 
and never succeed? Let me illustrate what I mean.
In 1947 there came a healing revival here in 
America which lasted through 1958. Several years 
before it came, God stirred me up to pray. I didn't know 
anybody else was praying; however, I am sure they 
were for this is God's way. God's plans are prayed 
through first.
I was seeking God because the only manifestation of 
the Spirit we had in our services was tongues and 
interpretation.
I said, "Lord, here in First Corinthians chapter 12, 
are all these other manifestations of the Spirit. But 
about all we ever see manifested are tongues and 
interpretation."
Thank God for tongues and interpretation, but let's 
not stop there. That is not all of it.
I said, "Your Word reveals three power gifts: special 
faith, working of miracles, and gifts of healings. These 
should be in manifestation among us."
75

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
(First Corinthians chapter 12 teaches nine 
manifestations of the Spirit [vv. 7-11]. These can be 
divided into three groups of three: the revelation gifts—
word of wisdom, word of knowledge, and discerning of 
spirits; the power gifts—special faith, gifts of healings, 
and the working of miracles; and the utterance gifts—
prophecy, tongues, and the interpretation of tongues.)
I prayed almost every night about this matter. 
Sometimes at three or four o'clock in the morning, I'd 
get up and pray an hour or so. In the winter, I'd go into 
the living room to pray by the heater. It was too cold to 
kneel on the bare floor in the bedroom because there 
was no heat in that room.
On three occasions, I woke up kneeling by the couch 
in the living room, and I didn't remember going in 
there. I said to myself, How did I get here? I must have 
come in here in my sleep.
I prayed about nothing other than the manifestation 
of the power gifts among us. I did not pray that God 
would use me, because I really preferred that God 
would use anyone else except me.
Many prayers for the supernatural workings of God 
are not answered because men's purposes are wrong. 
Oftentimes men have in mind, God use me.
I did not pray that He would use me. I couldn't have 
cared less whether He used me or not. I wanted people 
to be blessed and helped, for the Church to be 
enhanced, and for the glory to be given to God.
At that time, I prayed that these things would come 
into manifestation as they are revealed in God's Word. I 
knew they belonged to us. I prayed that we would have 
a prolific manifestation of these power gifts, and I just 
persisted in my praying.
76

What's Your Purpose?
One day, I went to my little study in the church to 
prepare the Sunday sermon. But I was so burdened to 
pray that I got out of my chair and started praying. I 
prayed approximately five hours in other tongues.
It was the longest I'd ever prayed in tongues at one 
time. I'd get up only to go next door to the parsonage for 
a drink of water, or to move around a little because I 
was on my knees all the time. But I counted only the 
time when I was actually in prayer.
I said, "Lord, I've been praying about the 
manifestation of Your Spirit, but I don't know what to 
pray for as I ought. So I'm praying in tongues, in the 
Holy Spirit, depending upon You to help me pray this 
thing through."
God wanted to manifest Himself, and I knew how to 
pray in a measure. But I still didn't know how to pray 
as I should. Today, we don't know exactly how to pray 
either. There's a move of God upon us. God is wanting 
to manifest Himself through signs and wonders to the 
world. We know to pray, and yet we don't know how to 
pray as we ought (Rom. 8:26). So we must rely on the 
Holy Ghost.
After approximately five hours into my prayer, I hit 
a "gusher." Glory to God! The Holy Ghost gave me a 
word of wisdom.
Some people say, "I don't ever get anything."
I know. You never stay long enough in the Presence 
of God to get anything. By the time it comes, you're 
gone.
When this word of wisdom came, I grabbed my pad 
and pencil and wrote it down: February 1943. I still 
have the original note. Here is what it said: At the close 
of World War II, there will come a revival of divine 
77

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
healing to America.
God's plan was revealed four years before it came!
The next year, I preached that at a young people's 
rally in Longview, Texas. I gave the date and told them 
what God said would happen. When I made this public 
announcement of God's plan, the power of God fell on 
the crowd. Every preacher ran to the altar. Every 
person present—both young and old—hit their knees 
praying. The glory fell on us.
It happened just as God had said: In 1947 the 
healing revival started.
Eventually, there were 120 ministers in what we 
called "The Voice of Healing." Every healing evangelist 
in America of any stature except Brother Oral Roberts 
was in it. The Voice of Healing magazine edited by 
Gordon Lindsay reported the revival, and we used this 
magazine as a medium of advertisement.
Now here is the point I want to get to, and Jesus 
talked to me about it in the recent visitation. I had to 
lay a foundation, however, for you to see it. You see, you 
can get God's plan, but your purpose can be wrong in 
carrying out His plan.
There was an outstanding healing evangelist in 
"The Voice of Healing." He was a man called of God and 
anointed by the Spirit. He had God's plan for the hour 
and God's plan for his life. He was equipped with 
supernatural equipment to fulfill the ministry God had 
given him. As the Spirit willed, the Holy Ghost 
manifested Himself through this man in some of the 
most miraculous things I've ever seen.
I saw blind eyes instantly opened through his 
ministry. I saw a person—the only one I've ever seen 
with this disease—whose body had begun to petrify. 
78

What's Your Purpose?
This dear one was carried into a meeting lying like 
stone on a stretcher, but was instantly delivered and 
arose and walked. It was a marvelous sight to behold.
Once my wife and I were traveling and we stopped 
by to visit one of his meetings. A state home for the deaf 
was nearby, and they had brought in five men who 
could neither hear nor speak. Each one, right down the 
line—one, two, three, four, five—was instantly healed 
before everyone's eyes.
The minister immediately got up and started 
receiving an offering and the anointing left.
His purpose was wrong. You can't use God's plan to 
raise money.
The Lord said to me about that same minister, "You 
go tell him he is not going to live much longer unless he 
judges himself." The Lord told me to tell him he must 
judge himself in three areas. One of those areas was 
about money. I did not go to this minister, and God 
dealt with me about that. But this minister never 
judged himself and within three years, he was dead at a 
young age.
Your purpose has to be God's purpose.
I trust you get the message of Jesus' appearance to 
me. A mighty move of God's Spirit is coming and we 
must keep our purposes right. We must pursue God's 
plan—not man's—with God's purpose.
You cannot use the things of God to raise money. 
You can only tell people what God has told you and give 
them an opportunity to be in on it so that fruit may 
abound to their account (Phil. 4:17). I tell people, "God 
said to start RHEMA Bible Training Center." But I put 
no emphasis on money. I tell people what we're doing 
and give them an opportunity to help if they want to 
79

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
and if they can. You have to be very careful in this area.
Jesus once said to me, "Many upon whom I have 
placed my Spirit and have called to the ministry have 
become money-minded and have lost the anointing."
Ohhh! I don't want to lose the anointing—not for a 
second, not for a minute. Every minister, every 
preacher, every singer, and every person called of God 
must be careful along these lines. We cannot take God's 
plan and pursue a different purpose. We have to pursue 
both His plan and His purpose.
Not only do we need to be careful about our motives 
concerning money, but we must beware of human ego.
Years ago at a Voice of Healing Convention, I heard 
a pastor say something that caught my attention. He 
was a good pastor and had established a good work. But 
it was in the days of revival—especially tent revivals. 
Healing evangelists were everywhere, and tents were 
everywhere.
This pastor said, "If Roberts [speaking of Oral 
Roberts] can do it, I can do it."
Was that God's plan and purpose for him? Or was it 
his human ego speaking? As a young man just in my 
thirties, I made a mental note of it and watched him to 
see what would happen.
He left his church and got a tent. And he did it. For 
a little while he did it almost as well as Brother 
Roberts. He had a 5,000-seat tent and finally got up to a 
10,000-seat tent. But then he went down, down, down.
During this same time, I was also in "The Voice of 
Healing," but God said to me, "You stay in the 
churches." And I stayed in them from 1949 until 1962, 
until God gave me a different plan.
80

What's Your Purpose?
I traveled from church to church, preaching 
constantly. I was in meetings ninety-five percent of the 
time. And in practically every meeting—I don't mean it 
happened occasionally; I don't mean it happened once in 
a great while; I mean in almost every meeting—
someone would stand up and prophesy that I was to get 
a tent.
"I've got a word for you. God wants you to get a 
tent."
God no more wanted me to get a tent than He wanted 
me to fly to Mars. And I didn't get one.
Why did they do that? They did it because everyone 
else was getting a tent. I watched many other ministers 
get a tent because people prophesied that they should. 
The tent, the minister, and the ministry folded up.
You don't do something because someone else is 
doing it. Find out what God wants you to do.
Why am I saying all these things? Why did the Lord 
Jesus visit me when He did and speak to me about 
plans, purposes, and pursuits? It's because He wants to 
move again in this day with supernatural 
manifestations! The move of God does not just belong to 
the revivals of the past! You see, there was a great 
revival and outpouring of the Holy Spirit that started in 
1906 in the old Azusa Street Mission in Los Angeles. By 
1907 that wave of revival began to spread nationally 
and internationally. Then in 1947, forty years later, the 
wave of the Healing Revival started. You talk about 
healing! I got in on it, and to tell you the truth about it, 
it was the easiest thing in the world to get people 
healed. I have never seen anything like what we had 
then; it was easy to get people healed!
A lady evangelist (really, she was more of an 
81

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
exhorter) once told me the same thing. She said, "My 
husband and I were in the ministry. He would play the 
piano and we would both sing, but I was the main 
preacher. We had been in the ministry for more than 
thirty years, but we had never laid hands on anyone in 
all that time. We would just hold meetings, get people 
saved and filled with the Holy Spirit, and exhort them a 
little. But when this wave of healing came along and 
everyone was laying hands on folks for healing, we 
decided we would try it too.
"The first person I laid hands on," she said, "was 
totally blind and was instantly healed! Dear Lord, it 
almost scared me to death! It was the easiest thing in 
the world to get folks healed. It was just like healing 
was 'in the air.' We had some of the most miraculous 
things happen you ever saw in your life!"
A healing wave like this is coming to the Body of 
Christ again. There will be miraculous healings like 
this in this next move of God! We need to know the 
wave is coming, and we need to know how to prepare 
ourselves to be effective in it. That is the reason I have 
recorded in this book what Jesus said to me in the 
visitation of 1987. He said that the Body of Christ is to 
get His plan, His purposes, and pursue that!
82
