Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
Chapter 8: 8 Reverence: Key to God's Presence

and Power
When I first looked at the luminous dial of the clock 
in the early morning hours of Thursday, July 16, 1987, 
it read three o'clock. When I looked at the clock after 
the visitation, it was seven minutes before six o'clock.
In the intervening hours, I'd been caught away in 
the Spirit. In Revelation 1:10, it says that John was "... 
in the Spirit on the Lord's day ..." and that he saw 
Jesus.
We know very little about being in the Spirit to tell 
the real truth about the matter. We get anointed with 
the Spirit to pray or to preach. But that is not what 
John meant when he said he was in the Spirit on the 
Lord's day. When you're in the Spirit—and I've been 
there several times—you don't really know right at the 
moment that y ou're even in the natural. Because you 
are in the Spirit—in the spirit realm!
I was in the Spirit on the morning of July 16, and I 
saw Jesus. I saw Him just as plainly as I could see you 
if you stood before me. I was caught up with Him to a 
place above the Tulsa Convention Center, and we were 
looking down upon what I knew was our upcoming 
Campmeeting which would begin Monday, July 20.
Although we were above the building, I could see 
into the auditorium.
I saw one of the services unfold before us. Jesus 
109

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
narrated as I looked on. I saw all of us in the 
auditorium as we were taking part in the service. As I 
looked down upon us we were all clapping like we do in 
Charismatic circles.
Jesus said something that astounded me. 
Understand what I'm going to say so you don't get the 
wrong impression about it. He said to me, "Clapping is 
neither praise nor worship." Jesus said that to me. He 
went on to say, "To clap is to applaud."
I'd never heard anyone say that. And even though I 
had been troubled at times when the congregation 
clapped so much during an inspired utterance that the 
anointing lifted and we missed some things the Spirit of 
God wanted to get over to us, these words of Jesus 
almost shocked me.
But as He continued to speak, I began to understand 
why I had been troubled. Best of all, I began to see what 
could be done to cooperate with Him so the fullness of 
His blessing and the depth of the move of the Spirit 
could come upon the Church.
A Help or a Hindrance?
In order to gain a better understanding of the place 
clapping should have in our services, first of all we need 
to understand what clapping is. Jesus said clapping is 
applause. He said it is neither praise nor worship. Well, 
if it isn't praise and it isn't worship, where does it fit in 
at all in our services?
I got a little illustration some time after 
Campmeeting that helped my understanding of 
clapping and I want to share it with you.
When a little boy receives a birthday present from 
his daddy, he may clap his hands and jump up and 
110

Reverence: Key to God's Presence and Power
down. But he is not praising or worshipping his daddy
—he is expressing his own excitement and rejoicing 
over what he has just received. In other words, his 
clapping is only for his own benefit. It's an outworking 
of his own emotions.
In our services, we may clap sometimes just because 
we're excited or we're rejoicing, but that's not praising 
or worshipping God.
In the visitation, Jesus discussed clapping with me 
from the Scriptures. He said, "There is not one scripture 
in the New Testament about clapping. The Bible says in 
Psalm 47:1: 'O clap your hands, all ye people; shout 
unto God with the voice of triumph. ' Clapping in this 
verse denoted an attitude of victory; it was not a form of 
praise. That is the only time clapping before the Lord is 
mentioned, and that is in the Old Testament. There are 
also some occurrences in the Old Testament where 
people clapped their hands for other reasons, but it had 
no connection with the worship of God. Then there are 
also scriptures about the waves and the floods clapping 
their hands, but you understand, that is figurative 
language.
"There is not one single scripture," Jesus said to me, 
"in the New Covenant about anyone clapping their 
hands."
We do, however, have New Testament scripture for 
lifting our hands in worship to the Lord. In fact, the 
only instruction we have in the New Testament about 
what we are to do with our hands, is to lift them up! 
You remember, Paul—or as I like to say—the Holy 
Spirit through Paul, said, "I will therefore that men 
pray every where, lifting up holy hands, without wrath 
and doubting" (1 Tim. 2:8).
We've all heard it said that praise is the highest 
111

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
form of prayer. You see, prayer is not what many people 
think it is. Prayer isn't "Gimme, gimme, gimme." 
Among other things, prayer is fellowshipping with God. 
One type of prayer is praise and worship. Therefore, we 
would do no injustice to the text to read First Timothy 
2:8 like this: I will therefore that men... [praise] every 
where, lifting up holy hands...."
You see, the world claps or applauds, but you do not 
see them lifting their hands to praise or celebrate. No, 
the Church of the Lord Jesus Christ is to lift up holy 
hands to praise the Lord!
"The world claps," Jesus said to me. "Saints praise."
Then He illustrated it something like this: You can 
walk by dark dives (night clubs, beer joints, etc.) and 
look inside at what is going on. Those inside may be 
watching a show with nude dancers, and you will see 
them clapping their hands. They may be watching a 
sports event on a screen, and you will see them clapping 
their hands. Or you can go to a political rally, and when 
the politician says something everyone likes, they will 
clap their hands. But in none of these places do you see 
the crowd lift their hands.
Now that doesn't mean clapping is wrong in itself. 
But we do need to distinguish between clapping which 
is a natural expression of this world, and the raising of 
our hands which is a scriptural expression of the realm 
to which we as believers belong. We also need to 
identify when to clap and when to lift our hands in 
praise. Clapping at the wrong time can cause the 
anointing to lift from a service.
For example, many times when the Spirit of God is 
moving in a service through tongues and interpretation 
or prophecy, everyone will start clapping right in the 
middle of the interpretation or the prophecy. People get 
112

Reverence: Key to God's Presence and Power
excited and clap, but their clapping prevents everyone 
present from hearing what the Holy Spirit wanted to 
say. Such clapping couldn't be done in the Spirit, for if 
the tongue and interpretation or the prophecy is by the 
unction of the Spirit, then the Holy Spirit is 
interrupting Himself. If the Holy Spirit is saying 
something to the church and no one can hear it, then 
we're either wasting our time by allowing the 
manifestation of the Spirit or we're wasting our time by 
clapping.
Is prophecy right, or is it not? Is the Holy Spirit 
saying something, or is He not? Would the Holy Spirit 
interrupt Himself? Would people be moved upon by the 
Holy Spirit to clap when the Holy Spirit is saying 
something? No, we've just gotten "clap happy" in 
Charismatic circles, and it grieves the Holy Spirit.
As a minister, I've been in the position of being the 
one used by God to speak forth in prophecy or 
interpretation of tongues—when right in the middle of 
the prophecy, everyone will start clapping. Unless I am 
very careful, I can lose the anointing because the 
clapping distracts me, making it difficult to hear what 
the Holy Spirit is saying.
And then there have been times when the anointing 
left in spite of my efforts to stay in the flow of the 
Spirit, because the Holy Spirit was grieved. Clapping in 
the midst of the Spirit's manifestation displays 
irreverence for Him.
On several occasions, I have known there was more 
the Spirit wanted to say and I've known it was 
important that we hear the entire message. But what 
can you do? You can't continue without His help.
Even if the anointing does not lift and I continue to 
speak, no one can hear what is being said. If it's not for 
113

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
people to hear, why would the Holy Spirit move upon 
me to speak?
At other times, I've been up preaching under the 
anointing—I mean just going after it—when everyone 
started clapping in response to something I said. Well, 
they're applauding to show their agreement with what I 
said, but that is not the time or the place for applause. 
In the first place, I can't go on preaching because 
everyone will miss what I say while the clapping is 
going on. If what you're saying is by the unction of the 
Spirit, people need to hear it. And there should be 
enough respect for the Holy Spirit not to interrupt Him 
when He's moving.
Even during our worship, clapping is often done at 
inappropriate times. It causes the anointing to lift and 
destroys that sweet closeness of His Presence that we 
all sense.
You can see how this could happen even in a natural 
relationship such as the relationship between a man 
and a woman. What if the man and woman were sitting 
together talking for some time, exchanging words of 
endearment, and suddenly one of them began to clap? 
Wouldn't that seem inappropriate? Friends, when we're 
praising and worshipping the Lord, He is present!
For a long time in Charismatic circles, we've had the 
habit of clapping after every song we sing during a time 
of praise and worship. Possibly this has occurred 
because people have felt a need to respond in some way 
but haven't known exactly how to respond. However, 
clapping after every song disrupts the flow of worship. 
It takes our attention off the Lord. How much better it 
would be to lift our hands in worship and speak forth 
our thanksgiving and adoration to Him who first loved 
us!
114

Reverence: Key to God's Presence and Power
When to Clap and When to Praise
Don't misunderstand me; it's all right to clap in 
church services under some circumstances. Some folks 
have accused me of saying that we should never clap at 
all. That is not what I have said, and that's not what 
Jesus said to me.
During His visitation with me, the main thing the 
Lord was trying to say about clapping was to correct the 
excessive clapping that is taking place in our churches 
today. Instead of putting clapping before the lifting of 
our hands or the praising of God with our lips, it should 
come last, if at all. And it should be regulated—it 
should be at a minimum in services and not at a 
maximum.
Therefore, we need to understand when clapping is 
appropriate and when it is inappropriate.
If the congregation is singing an up-tempo song, it's 
all right for folks to clap their hands in time with the 
music. But when the song ends and the worship leader 
asks people to praise the Lord, they should lift their 
hands to praise Him as the New Testament teaches.
Also, in church, we shouldn't be applauding singers 
when they minister in special music. Their talent is 
God-given and is to be used for the glory and praise of 
God. They're not putting on a performance (or at least 
they shouldn't be); they're ministering in music to 
encourage the congregation to get their eyes on God and 
to lift them up into His Presence. If we appreciate their 
music, we should lift our hands and praise God. 
Applauding singers is not praising God, and we are to 
praise God. We are to lift up holy hands in praise of 
God. Now don't get upset if you've been clapping at the 
wrong times. I've been just as guilty as anyone else, so 
115

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
don't take exception to what I am saying.
There are times when we applaud a speaker to let 
him know we're glad he's come. It is a gesture of 
welcome after he has been introduced, and it's strictly 
on a natural level. That's all right as long as it's not 
overdone. We're not worshipping or praising the 
speaker.
However, since Jesus' visitation to me, I've been 
giving a lot of thought to things I hadn't really 
considered too much before. I have some compunction 
now about saying, "Let's all give God a hand." I don't 
think we can give God a hand like we would the 
President of the United States. I don't think we should 
give God a "clap-offering."
Paul said to the Corinthians in First Corinthians 
2:3, "And I was with you ... in fear...." That doesn't 
mean he was afraid of something like someone would be 
afraid of a storm or a rattlesnake. That means he had a 
respect, an awareness of the awesomeness of God and of 
his responsibilities as a minister of God.
The Hebrew scribes who copied the Scriptures by 
hand had such a respect for God that before they would 
write His Name they would stop and take a ritual bath 
and put on clean clothes.
We've gotten away from the respect for God that we 
should have. I don't feel comfortable giving God a hand 
like you would a politician; I don't want to bring Him 
down on a level with man. He is high and holy. The 
New Testament teaches us to lift our hands and our 
voices to God in praise.
Jesus said to me, "Pastors should teach their 
congregations little by little about the move of the Holy 
Spirit so they'll know how to move with Him and they'll 
116

Reverence: Key to God's Presence and Power
know when to keep quiet. They shouldn't scold their 
people or train them in a negative way, but they need to 
teach them to be quiet when the Holy Spirit is in 
manifestation. They should tell them to listen, and after 
the Holy Spirit has spoken, to lift their hands and 
praise Me."
Reverence
As Jesus was discussing the subject of clapping and 
raising of the hands in praise to Him, He made this 
statement: "When you really learn to praise and 
worship Me in the right way, you'll find a stronger 
anointing and a greater move of the Holy Spirit in your 
midst."
We need to learn that when the Presence of the Lord 
is in a place, we should not dissipate that Presence—
that power. Be quiet and reverent and then you'll see 
the manifestation of the Holy Ghost that your heart has 
longed for.
You haven't see anything like what we will see when 
the Body of Christ gets to that place of worship.
We were in that kind of atmosphere worshipping 
God in one of our crusades, and there were five people 
sitting in wheelchairs. Three of them just got up and 
walked off. No one laid a hand on them. But for that to 
happen, we have to begin to get into the flow of the Holy 
Spirit.
When you get in an atmosphere of true worship, and 
God begins to move by His Spirit, you can just reach out 
and take what belongs to you in Christ. The Bible 
teaches laying on of hands, but you really don't have to 
have hands laid on you when the Presence of God is so 
strongly in manifestation. No matter what you may 
117

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
need, you can reach out and take it and say, "It's mine!"
But when people begin to demonstrate in the flesh, 
the anointing lifts—it flies away like a bird taking flight 
because it grieves the Spirit. I wish I could get that over 
to people. I've been in meetings of several thousand 
where the Holy Spirit was moving, and suddenly, I 
knew by the Holy Spirit when the anointing came upon 
me to stand over in the office of the prophet and 
minister to the people. I was just ready to call out 
certain people, to point to them right where they stood, 
and say, "The Spirit of God just showed me this is what 
is wrong with you." I've ministered that way many 
times through the years, and every time, the people 
have been healed. When I've ministered under that 
kind of an anointing, I've never had one person fail to 
get healed. I could tell you about thousands of people 
who were healed that way through the many years of 
my ministry.
However, sometimes when the anointing has come 
to minister in that office, people in the congregation 
have gotten up and started moving about. The lack of 
reverence for God moving in the service grieved the 
Spirit and He left; the anointing lifted from me. I mean, 
just like a bird sitting on your shoulder, it flew away—
the anointing left. And those people didn't even know it; 
they went out talking and whispering. Maybe they were 
in a hurry to leave and get something to eat, but they 
didn't know that they had just hindered some dear sick 
people from being healed—sometimes people with 
terminal cases.
I got a note from one pastor who told me about a 
woman in one of his services who had a terminal illness. 
The doctor said she had terminal cancer and had ninety 
days to live. The pastor wrote that the Lord healed her 
118

Reverence: Key to God's Presence and Power
in one of his services. A terminal case like that healed 
because the Spirit of God moved supernaturally! 
However, then in the service so many in the 
congregation began to talk and move about that it 
grieved the Spirit of God and He stopped moving. You 
can't help people then because it's the anointing that 
breaks the yoke. The Bible said, it is the anointing that 
breaks the yoke. "... the yoke shall be destroyed because 
of the anointing" (Isa. 10:27).
There is a move of the Spirit of God that God is 
wanting in this day. God is wanting to do something for 
us today! Let's not hinder Him. Let's just cooperate 
with Him and let's be reverent. When God is moving, 
let's just sit quietly and reverence him. Then if we want 
to shout afterwards—we can shout. I mean, afterwards, 
when the crippled start dancing in the Spirit, that's the 
time to jump up and dance with them!
God has been trying to teach us some of these 
things, and we've been endeavoring to demonstrate 
them for several years.
I was preaching down in East Texas a number of 
years ago in a Full Gospel church, and God instructed 
me to lay hands on people to be filled with the Holy 
Spirit. Laying hands on people to receive the Holy 
Spirit is God's plan—it's Biblical.
However, in Texas in 1950, people didn't do that. 
But the Lord told me to do it. I went to a little Full 
Gospel church, and I just set out to do what God told 
me to do. I called for those who wanted to be filled with 
the Spirit to come forward, and seven people came to 
the altar.
I purposely had them sit down on the altar, because 
I wanted to teach them a little first. I knew if I didn't 
teach them, they would just start praying at the altar 
119

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
and get themselves in a rut tarrying for God, trying to 
receive the Holy Spirit because they'd been doing that 
for years. (I ran into one fellow who had been seeking to 
be baptized in the Holy Spirit for fifty years.) So I knew 
if I just had them come down to the altar and pray, 
they'd get in that same rut and not be able to get out of 
it. I purposely kept them off their knees, so I could give 
them a little instruction first.
I taught them for a while, and then I laid hands on 
the first one and he immediately began to speak in 
tongues. When that happened, the people in the 
congregation jumped up and started shouting and 
running everywhere. I had to go back to the pulpit and 
shout in order to get their attention so they could hear 
me. I said, "Wait a minute, wait. WAIT! WAIT! Sit 
down." They all sat down. Then I told them, "Now wait, 
don't dissipate the power by shouting and carrying on. 
We've got six more people here that need to be filled 
with the Spirit. Let's get them filled; then we'll all shout 
and demonstrate if we want to." They looked at me like 
a cow at a new gate; that was all new to them.
I went down the line laying hands on those other six 
people, and every single one of them was filled with the 
Holy Spirit and started speaking with tongues. When 
the last one was filled with the Holy Spirit, I started 
speaking in tongues and just turned around and ran 
down the aisle, ran back up another aisle, ran up on the 
platform, danced a little jig for joy, and ran back down 
the aisle again. Everyone just sat there and looked at 
me.
Finally, I had to say to them, "It's time to dance 
now." They hadn't gotten their timing right! I told them, 
"After seven people get filled with the Holy Spirit, it's 
time to run and dance!" But, see, a lot of people want to 
120

Reverence: Key to God's Presence and Power
run and dance at the other fellow's expense—when the 
timing's wrong—and dissipate the power.
During this visitation before Campmeeting '87, the 
Lord dealt with me very strongly about the fact that 
He's trying to get the Body of Christ to the place where 
He can move by His Spirit in our midst. I'm gradually 
seeing that come to pass. The Body of Christ is finally 
coming to the place where God can move in our services 
like He wants to. This is the time! The Body of Christ 
has finally come to that time now, and is getting ready 
for the move that God wants in the earth, glory to God!
Several years ago, the Lord said to me, "There is a 
move of the Spirit of God that will be lost to this 
present generation unless they are taught and led into 
it."
I don't know that we have been successful at this 
yet. But we're finally coming to the place where we can 
begin to teach this.
The Lord went on to say to me, "Some of the old-
time Pentecostals knew something about that deeper 
move of the Spirit. The modern-day Pentecostals—this 
new generation of Charismatics—know little or nothing 
about it. Charismatics know little or nothing about the 
move of My Spirit. Charismatics know a little about 
praising Me, but they know nothing at all about true 
worship."
You see, when you talk about worship, there is a 
spirit of reverence that goes along with it. As I've 
already mentioned, in the church I pastored in 
Farmersville, Texas, we regularly experienced the 
awesome Presence of God. But we were always very 
careful to reverence the Holy Spirit in our services. 
Consequently, the miraculous was an everyday 
occurrence with us. We haven't really experienced that 
121

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
in the Charismatic Movement. There's been a lightness 
in Charismatic services; a "hip-hip-hooray" type of 
atmosphere.
Ohhhh! But in times past, I've seen the Presence of 
God come in and fill the temple! When I say "the 
temple,"
I mean a body of believers. During those times when 
the Presence of God came into our services, no one 
moved; an awesome Presence filled the room. I wish I 
could describe that awesome Presence to you. Some 
things are just too reverent to talk about and it's hard 
to find words to describe them. But I've seen the 
awesome Presence of God come in and fill the temple. I 
long to see the Body of Christ experience that Presence 
on a continual basis!
At this writing, it has been almost a year since 
Jesus' 1987 visitation with me. In our own ministry, we 
have been experiencing the deeper move of the Spirit of 
God among us which Jesus promised. Just a short while 
after the summer Campmeeting, our crusade team was 
in Detroit. One of our singers was singing a song of the 
Spirit, fresh from Heaven, given by the inspiration of 
the Spirit in that moment. Upon hearing one of the 
lines of the song, the crowd began to clap. The singer 
stopped and exhorted the congregation, "Please don't 
clap anymore." They received the instruction and 
listened to what the Spirit was saying as he went on 
with the spiritual song.
A depth, an indescribable Presence like a cloud filled 
the auditorium. We had no preaching that night. The 
Holy Spirit came upon me in a greater measure to 
minister by the Spirit in healings and in other ways.
Afterwards, I asked those seated in the ministers' 
section if they had noticed how the anointing increased 
122

Reverence: Key to God's Presence and Power
after we stopped clapping and turned our attention and 
worship to God. They all indicated by nodding their 
heads that they had.
There is a reverence, an awesome sense of the 
holiness of God which can come upon a congregation. As 
the Body of Christ, we've got to get back to that place of 
reverence.
For when we reverence God and give Him the honor 
and worship due unto Him, His Presence will fill the 
place where we are gathered. It is His Presence which 
will meet the deepest longings of our hearts and set the 
captives free.
123
