Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
Chapter 1: 1 Visitation

Not as though I had already attained, either were 
already perfect [mature or full grown] : but I follow 
after, if that I may apprehend that for which also I am 
apprehended of Christ Jesus.
Brethren, I count not myself to have apprehended: 
but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which 
are behind, and reaching forth unto those things 
which are before,
I press toward the mark for the prize of the high 
calling of God in Christ Jesus.
—Philippians 3:12-14
And I, brethren, when I came to you, came not 
with excellency of speech or of wisdom, declaring unto 
you the testimony of God.
For I determined not to know any thing among 
you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified.
And I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and 
in much trembling.
And my speech and my preaching was not with 
enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration 
of the Spirit and of power:
That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of 
men, but in the power of God.
—1 Corinthians 2:1-5
Several days before our annual Campmeeting in 
1987, I had a visitation from the Lord. As I relate that 
visitation, I share it with you in weakness and in 
reverence and in much trembling because of the 
awesomeness of God's power and His Presence. Paul 
11

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
said, "I was with you in weakness, and in fear ..." (1 Cor. 
2:3). Of course, that didn't mean he was afraid like you 
would be afraid of a rattlesnake or a tornado. Paul 
meant that he had a godly fear, an awe, and a reverence 
for God. It is with that same reverence that I now relate 
to you that awesome visitation I had from the Lord the 
week before our Campmeeting.
First, let me explain that I do most of my praying at 
night. Most of my life I have been a night person. I'm 
older now and have changed some, but I have always 
been more alert at midnight than at any other hour of 
the day. That is why I used to do all of my studying at 
night. Many times I have studied and read all night 
long.
I got in the habit of praying during the night when I 
was bedfast in 1933 and 1934. I couldn't pray any other 
way except in bed, because I was bedfast—tied to that 
bed. I couldn't get up and walk. I remember one night in 
particular, I prayed all night long. I never slept at all; I 
just prayed. Several nights I prayed nearly all night 
long. Many nights I would pray an hour or two before I 
went to sleep.
I always looked forward to nighttime when everyone 
else was in bed and things got quiet, so that I could 
pray. In the daytime, someone always had to sit in the 
room with me. That went on for many months because 
they thought I was going at any moment, so they would 
only allow one person in the room at a time and that 
person had to sit with me. I got into the habit of praying 
at night when I could be alone, and I guess I have just 
followed that through the years. Many times, God has 
spoken to me in the night.
On July 16, the Thursday morning preceding our 
annual Campmeeting, I was awakened and I couldn't 
12

Visitation
get back to sleep, so I began to pray in the Spirit. As I 
prayed in the Spirit in other tongues, I kept saying 
these words over in English: "Plans, purposes. " Plans 
and purposes. I said to the Lord, "Lord, that is not all of 
that. I know it isn't," and I kept on praying in tongues. 
Finally, I prayed out in English, "Plans, purposes, and 
pursuits." Plans, purposes, and pursuits!
I was caught up into the Spirit and I began to see 
and understand man's plans as they related to God's 
plans. I could see that many times men had plans that 
were good and even thoroughly scriptural. But they 
were not God's plains.
This experience was unusual and it lasted almost 
three hours. Part of it was revelation, and part of it was 
a vision. It began about three o'clock in the morning, 
and the last time I looked at the clock, it was almost six 
o'clock.
When I was caught up into the Spirit to where Jesus 
was standing, it seemed that Jesus and I were standing 
up a little higher than the ceiling of the Tulsa 
Convention Center, looking down on our Campmeeting 
services—which were scheduled to begin there the 
following Monday. I saw the Monday night service 
unfold before us, and I saw many things that would 
happen in the other services throughout the week. 
Jesus was the narrator and He explained what was 
taking place as I looked on.
As I stood there with Jesus—Jesus narrating and 
explaining the things that were happening in the 
services—I saw that this Campmeeting would be one of 
the most monumental and momentous Campmeetings 
we have ever had. I saw that the results of this 
Campmeeting would be forthcoming for a long, long 
time.
13

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
As I was standing up there with Jesus seeing all 
this unfold, I asked Him, "Lord, why didn't You visit me 
far enough in advance so we could have advertised to 
the people that this Campmeeting was going to be 
unusual? More people would have come if they would 
have known that."
Jesus answered, "The reason I didn't was because 
then the curiosity seekers and those seeking the 
sensational would have come. I just wanted those 
people to be here that I had directed to come."
Sad to say, in the Body of Christ there are those 
people who are just seeking the sensational. They are 
always seeking after anything that is new. Those people 
would have come with the wrong purpose. They would 
be the ones to say, "Let's go hear Brother Hagin! He's 
had another visitation! Let's go hear about it!" They are 
also usually the ones who take what you say and twist 
it.
Some people pick up on one part of what you say, 
twist it, and go off into excess and error and create 
confusion in the Body of Christ. There will probably be 
those who will read this book and take what I am 
saying out of context and get off into error. However, 
misguided people prone to error should not keep us 
from flowing with what is Biblical and right. It should 
not keep us from flowing with what the Holy Spirit is 
wanting to teach the Body of Christ in this hour! I 
believe that those who have ears to hear will hear what 
the Spirit is saying to the Church in this hour and will 
cooperate with Him to help usher in the move of God all 
of our hearts so earnestly desire.
A New Beginning
14

Visitation
Only two or three times in the many years of my 
ministry have I had an experience like this one which 
took place prior to Campmeeting '87. The first such 
experience I had occurred in 1953.
I was praying in the Spirit on a Friday night and I 
saw my Sunday night service. When it came time for 
the service Sunday night, I just acted out what I had 
seen myself do. Marvelous, miraculous things happened 
in that service.
Then I had another experience like that in 1954 
when I was preaching in California at a convention for a 
Full Gospel denomination. I had gotten off to sleep one 
night, but I woke up in the night with a sense of 
urgency to pray. I lay there praying quietly in the 
Spirit, not disturbing anyone, until about four o'clock in 
the morning. All of a sudden, I saw my service that 
night. Among other things, I saw a woman who had 
been brought in on a stretcher get up in front of 
everyone and walk off healed. When it came time for my 
service, I just acted out what I had seen myself do, and 
everything happened just as I had seen it! A woman 
was carried into the service on a stretcher, and she got 
up and walked off healed!
In the 1987 visitation with the Lord, Jesus told me 
some things that He is wanting to do in this day in the 
Church—His plans—and why He has not been able to 
do them. If the Body of Christ will cooperate with God, 
and get in line with His plan and His purposes, and 
pursue that plan, then God will be able to accomplish 
what He wants to in this day!
The Body of Christ has been in the shallow water of 
a new beginning for the last two or three years. We are 
just now moving out into another new beginning. We 
are just getting to the place where the Lord can begin to 
15

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
do some of the things He has wanted to do in this day 
and in this hour!
The things Jesus explained to me in this visitation 
were to help get the Body of Christ ready for this next 
great move of God's Spirit upon the earth. The spiritual 
truths that Jesus shared in this visitation are just 
simply the springboard, so to speak, which will spring 
the Body of Christ into a realm of the supernatural in a 
way and in a place that we have barely been before. 
Why? Because we will be following His plans and His 
purposes and pursuing them!
In the wave of God's blessing that is coming upon 
the earth, the things that have been manifested 
occasionally will become commonplace with the Body of 
Christ. The Head of the Church, the Lord Jesus Christ, 
is directing the activities of His Body in the world 
today, and He will receive all the praise and honor and 
glory for it.
Oh, there is a move of the Spirit of God, dear 
friends. But we can't just jump into it. God wants to get 
us there, and that is why we have to follow His plans, 
His purposes, and pursue them. In this visitation, Jesus 
told me, "This move will be lost unless the people are 
taught how to move with My Spirit."
There will be some who will read this and be just as 
lifeless as they ever were. Others will say, "Isn't that 
marvelous?" and do nothing to follow after God's plans, 
purposes, and pursuits for their lives. But there will be 
those people who will catch on and take hold of what 
the Lord is trying to get across to the Body of Christ in 
this hour, and get God's plan for their lives and follow 
after that! Those who do, will be ready for the move 
that God is wanting to bring upon the earth in this day.
The Body of Christ has not seen anything like what 
16

Visitation
we will see when we get to that place where we have 
God's plan and purpose, not only for our own lives but 
also for the Church—and we are pursuing that plan!
17
