Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
Chapter 3: 3 Except the Lord Build the House

Except the Lord build the house, they labour in 
vain that build it....
—Psalm 127:1
Throughout more than fifty years of ministry, Psalm 
127:1 has been the main scripture I've based my life 
upon. Before I ever move to do anything, I make sure 
the Lord is in it.
Notice in this scripture, that they did build the 
house. They got it built, all right, but their labor was all 
in vain because the Lord wasn't in it. So many times in 
the ministry, what we do is good, but it is not the Lord's 
plan at all. It is man's plan.
Psalm 127:1 refers to more than just building a 
house. Of course, in the natural, if God is not in 
whatever you are doing, it will fail. But the Bible is 
talking here about spiritual things as well.
Whatever you are doing for God, ask yourself, Is this 
God's plan? Remember, if the Lord is not building the 
house, all your labor is in vain. You can build an entire 
house and yet not have any part of it built according to 
God's plan. This verse points out that they had to labor 
to build it because God was not in it. Get God involved 
in whatever you are doing. Find out what His plan is 
before you ever begin to build.
It is easy to stray from God's plan. Ministers 
especially are susceptible to straying from God's plan 
with something which seems right, good, and 
33

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
legitimate. But if God didn't tell them to do it, and it is 
not His plan for them, they end up pursuing the wrong 
plan. When this happens, they forfeit the fullness of 
God's blessing.
For example, on October 1, 1979, we started Healing 
School on the RHEMA campus at the Lord's direction. 
Through the years, we've received marvelous 
testimonies from people who have been healed.
We had a custom of beginning these healing classes 
with someone leading singing. Many times, we would 
spend forty-five minutes just singing and worshipping 
the Lord. One day as I was going to Healing School, the 
Lord spoke to me. It was so real that it was just as if 
someone were walking beside me. The Lord said, "What 
is the purpose of this meeting?"
I answered, "It's a healing meeting."
"What kind of a healing meeting?"
"Well, we're teaching people who need to be healed 
how to receive healing and we are teaching others how 
to minister to the sick. That's the purpose."
"Then," the Lord said to me, "it's not a worship 
service."
"No," I said, "it's not a worship service."
"Then don't try to have a worship service. Only sing 
a few songs, just enough to get the congregation to 
participate, and go right into your teaching."
So we stopped conducting our Healing School as we 
had been. We got in line with God's plan. We sing and 
praise fifteen minutes or so, and then we go right into 
our lesson.
The area of worship was not the only place where 
we missed it in conducting our Healing School. Without 
34

Except the Lord Build the House
realizing it, we drifted into the counseling business. 
Eventually, we built a building called the "Prayer and 
Healing Center”, and we put in counseling rooms. 
People came by in person or telephoned for all kinds of 
counseling—marital, financial, spiritual, etc.
After a while, we could sense that something wasn't 
right. It seemed as though we were "washing our feet 
with our socks on."
So we prayed. My wife and I prayed with the leader 
of the Prayer and Healing Center. We asked the people 
who gathered regularly for prayer at RHEMA to pray 
with us about it.
One night during this prayer meeting, as I knelt 
beside a chair on the platform, the Lord spoke to me.
He said, "You've preached James 5:14 and 15 for 
years. Did you ever notice it is prayer and healing—not 
prayer, counseling, and heeding?"
Of course you teach people the Word. That's what 
the lessons were about as we had the daily teaching on 
healing. But the Lord said to me, "Go look at the sign on 
the building. It says Prayer and Healing Center—not 
Prayer, Counseling, and Healing. I didn't tell you to 
counsel at all. You added that."
Then He said to me in just these words, "Don't 
counsel anybody except people of your own sheepfold. 
You can counsel employees and students at the school 
because that is your sheepfold. But do not counsel 
others. If they need counseling, they ought to be 
counseled in their own sheepfold. And if they do not 
have a sheepfold, that is where their problem is."
Thank God for teachers. Thank God for evangelists. 
Thank God for apostles and prophets. But we need the 
pastoral office. The shepherd lives with the sheep.
35

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
When I'm out in meetings, I encourage people: "Send 
your tithes to your own church. The Bible teaches tithes 
and offerings. You can send me an offering if you want 
to, but keep your own church going."
You need the pastor. The crises of life come to all of 
us. The time may come when you or someone you know 
is in the hospital. You can call our office and we'll pray 
because the Bible teaches prayer. I won't come to the 
hospital, however. I can't, but your pastor will. (You 
may not have even been attending or supporting your 
local church. In fact, if it had depended upon you, the 
church may have been dead and bankrupt long ago.) 
But if you call your pastor, he'll be there to anoint you 
with oil and pray, and to stand with you in that hour.
Some of your kinfolks might die (God didn't say we'd 
live forever) and you might need people with you. Don't 
call me because I can't come. Or someone in your family 
may want to get married. Don't send for me or any 
other television or radio preacher because we can't come 
to marry them.
The local pastor attends to those matters. This is 
God's plan for the local church. But where the Prayer 
and Healing Center is concerned, God has a different 
plan, and we've got to follow God's plan for us. And in 
this case, we had to get in line with God by 
discontinuing outside counseling.
Another area in which I strayed from God's plan 
was in the format for our annual Campmeeting.
Many years ago, I began conducting meetings in 
Tulsa at the Sheridan Assembly Christian Center. The 
whole building wouldn't hold more than 800 people, and 
we usually had about 400 people who attended 
regularly. At night, local people would come and fill up 
the building. I used to hold crusades in that church—I'd 
36

Except the Lord Build the House
just put on my own meeting and use their building.
One night I surprised myself (I surprise myself all 
the time saying things out of my spirit). I said, "This 
summer, we're going to have a faith seminar and an 
indoor campmeeting. God said we are to start one." 
After I said it, I turned around and said, "Who said 
that?" and found that it had come out of my own mouth! 
I was speaking by inspiration; I never thought that up. 
It just came up out of my spirit.
Sometimes I'll say things by the Spirit of God, and 
my wife or Ken or Lynette will tell me what I said. I'll 
say, "I didn't say that—I know better." "Yes, you did!" 
they'll say, and when I go back and play the tape, sure 
enough, I said it!
The point is that the Lord gave us His plan and His 
purpose for Campmeeting, so we began to have a faith 
seminar and an indoor campmeeting. Then three years 
ago, the Lord spoke to me again about Campmeeting, 
because we had unconsciously drifted away from His 
plan and purpose.
I was praying about three o'clock one morning, and 
the Lord spoke to me, "When I told you to start having a 
faith seminar and an indoor campmeeting, I told you 
explicitly that the morning services were to be a faith 
seminar, the afternoon meetings were to be as the Holy 
Spirit leads, and the night services were to be the 
Campmeeting."
That was God's plan. But then, some way or 
another, without thinking, we had substituted our own 
plans, and had different teachers come in and teach on 
whatever subject they chose.
Young people don't understand about Campmeeting.
Some of the old-timers of Pentecost do. In fact, that's 
37

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
where we got the expression—from the old-timers. 
They'd come from all around and camp on the grounds. 
They'd come in wagons, and bring food along with them 
and hay for their horses. They'd just camp on the 
ground, and they were there all the time until the 
campmeeting was over. In our modern day, we're in 
such a hurry that we come in for a church service and 
stay for thirty minutes and want to go! But that's not 
campmeeting!
Campmeeting is a time when we all come together 
to enjoy the things of God and just relax in the Presence 
of God. We come away from our jobs and other 
distractions and just allow the Holy Spirit to do what 
He wants to do.
After the Lord spoke to me again about 
Campmeeting, we immediately began to implement His 
plan. We got back to His plan—not my plan or anyone 
else's plan.
A pastor once told me, "There's no telling how much 
money I've spent getting on planes and flying across the 
country trying to build my church. I'd hear of a pastor 
who was having success. I'd go there, learn how he did 
it, and then come back and implement that plan in my 
church. Instead of gaining ground though, I'd lose 
ground. The other fellow put that plan into effect and 
his congregation tripled. I put it into effect and lost 
twenty percent of the people. Since then, I flew across 
the country to another church and stayed one week, 
observed, and made notes. I went back to my church 
and adopted that plan. And I lost more people."
At the time I talked to this pastor, his congregation 
was one third of what it had been originally. "What am 
I going to do?" he asked me. He wanted me to give him 
a plan.
38

Except the Lord Build the House
I said, "I don't know what God's plan is for you. Get 
alone with God and find out."
He said, "I don't have time—I'm too busy pastoring."
Dear friends, if you're too busy to wait on God to 
discover His plan, you may go through your entire life 
and everything you do will be in vain. Then what will 
you say to God when you stand before Him in eternity? 
He won't ask you about those things you did according 
to your ideas and plans. He will want to know what you 
did about His plan for your life.
The Secret of Success
A few years ago, I attended what was called an 
"Idea Exchange." Ministers from various churches and 
denominations across the country were invited to that 
meeting.
At that meeting, some of those ministers asked me, 
"Brother Hagin, what is the secret of your success?" 
One minister said, "When I first knew you, nobody had 
ever heard of you. You were preaching in small 
churches and, once in a while, in a large church. But 
then, all of a sudden, you became not only a national 
figure, but in just a matter of a few years—an 
international figure. Now how did that all come about? 
What is the secret of your success?"
I answered, "The only secret of success I know is 
walking in line with the Word of God, and praying and 
listening to the Holy Spirit. I simply listen to what the 
Spirit of God says to do, and then do it." Actually, 
everything I'm doing today is the result of believing the 
Word, praying in other tongues, and being obedient to 
what God told me to do.
Thank God for the value of praying in other tongues. 
39

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
Sometimes I interpreted my own prayers. In fact, that 
is how I first started interpreting—by interpreting my 
own prayers.
To tell you the real truth about the matter, praying 
in other tongues was instrumental even in showing me 
about my marriage and my children. I pastored a 
pentecostal church in Tom Bean, Texas, in 1938 where I 
met my lovely wife. I was a 21-year-old pastor and I 
needed a helpmeet.
I was praying up in a barn loft that belonged to one 
of my deacons. I had been going with Oretha for a while 
at that point. I began praying in other tongues about 
my future, and I prayed this all out in other tongues. 
Then I prayed the interpretation out: I saw in the Spirit 
that I would marry her and that we'd have two 
children, and that's what happened!
I got that in prayer. I didn't get that because I was 
standing in the office of the prophet, because I wasn't at 
that time.
When you get down on your knees and find out for 
yourself what His plans are—because He will put His 
approval and His blessings on His plans—it works so 
much better. It will almost work like clockwork.
I remember how God dealt with me before the 
beginning of what has come to be called the 
Charismatic Movement.
In December 1962, I was preaching in a Full Gospel 
church in Houston. Suddenly, I felt a wind blowing 
upon me. It came with such force that it knocked me 
flat on the floor and I fell into a trance. (In Acts 10:9,10, 
the Bible says that Peter went up on the housetop to 
pray and fell into a trance.) All my physical senses were 
suspended.
40

Except the Lord Build the House
I saw a beautiful flower garden surrounded with a 
white picket fence. In the middle of it was a pavilion or 
arbor. The garden was full of the most beautiful flowers 
of every kind. The arbor itself was made up of climbing 
flower plants. Each flower was in full bloom and was 
giving off a wonderful aroma. The perfume was visible 
as it rose into the air.
I came up from the east to the gate of the fence. 
Jesus was standing just inside. When I got there, He 
unlatched the gate, and pushed it open. He reached out 
His hand, took my right hand, led me inside, and shut 
the gate. Then He took my right hand in both of His 
hands, and led me down the path to the arbor.
Two white marble benches were on either side of the 
arbor. He sat on the bench to the south and without 
saying a word, pulled me down beside Him.
I looked around. From the west, I saw a river 
flowing into the garden. It was broad at its beginnings 
back up in the sky and it narrowed as it flowed into this 
little garden. As I looked, the river changed. It became 
people—people of every nationality, people of every 
dress and station of life. They were flowing into the 
garden.
I said, "Lord, who are these people? What does all 
this mean?"
Jesus said to me, "These are people from what you 
call 'denominational' churches and even from other 
religions of the world. In this day, I am visiting hungry 
hearts everywhere. I will visit places you never would 
have thought I would visit—not only what you call 
'denominational' churches, but I will visit other 
religions where hearts are hungry and open to Me. 
These are people who will come into the light of the 
new birth and the fullness of being filled with the Holy 
41

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
Spirit. They will flow as one. The aroma that goes up is 
the praise of these people ascending into heaven, even 
as the incense of old ascended unto Me.
"You must play a part in this," Jesus said. "I want 
you to minister to the whole Body."
Jesus kept saying that: "I want you to minister to 
the whole Body," while I watched the following scene 
run off before me like you'd watch something on 
television.
I saw myself ministering in Baptist churches. I saw 
myself ministering in Presbyterian churches, in 
Methodist churches, in Disciples of Christ churches, 
and even in Roman Catholic churches—and I've done it! 
I saw people falling under the power and lying all 
around the front of Methodist, Baptist, Presbyterian, 
Catholic, and other denominational churches—and it 
has come to pass!
That might not seem so amazing to you now, but it 
was shocking to Full Gospel circles in those days. I was 
a Pentecostal preacher who preached strictly in 
Pentecostal churches.
That happened in December 1962. In January 1963, 
I was holding a meeting in another Full Gospel church 
in Houston. One night, a spirit of prayer suddenly fell 
on us. (We don't see that much anymore. In fact, we 
don't see it at all. You see, we only permit the Holy 
Spirit to go so far in Charismatic circles. But as we 
learn to follow God and really, truly worship Him, the 
Holy Spirit will be able to manifest Himself as He 
desires to.)
At this meeting in 1963, I was just preaching away 
and a spirit of prayer fell on us. Everyone hit the floor 
praying. I didn't tell the people to pray—the Holy Spirit 
42

Except the Lord Build the House
just came upon the people to pray. I looked back across 
the congregation and no one was sitting on the pews. 
Everyone was either down around the altar praying or 
kneeling at their seats praying.
I stepped down off the platform, knelt by the steps, 
and began to pray. I had only been praying a short time 
when I was in the Spirit. For lack of a better word, I call 
it "getting lost in the Spirit," because time goes by and 
you think you've only been praying a few minutes but 
actually, you've been praying much longer.
By the time I finally opened my eyes and looked, I 
thought I'd been praying about fifteen minutes. I had 
not been conscious of anything else that went on around 
me, but actually I had been praying an hour and a half. 
I looked around and there was no one in the church 
except the pastor and me. I said to him, "Something 
happened to my watch. It must be running fast."
"No," he said, "that's the right time. I saw that you 
were lost in the Spirit so I didn't bother you."
Toward the end of my praying, I suddenly realized 
that I was doing something, so I opened my eyes. With 
my thumb and index finger, I had formed a circle. With 
the index finger of the other hand, I was tracing a circle 
inside those fingers. I'd go all around that circle one 
way, and then I'd come back around it, praying in 
tongues the whole time. I'd go three quarters of the way 
around the circle, and go back around, still praying in 
tongues. I'd go half way around it, then back again, still 
praying in tongues. I'd go a quarter of the way around, 
and trace it back again, praying in tongues. I thought, 
What am I doing? Then I began to interpret what I was 
praying about.
This was the interpretation: "You're going in a circle 
in your ministry. You'll go all the way around that 
43

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
circle, and then you'll go back around it over and over 
again. (I was about to go back to a church where I'd 
been nine times before.) You'll go three quarters of the 
way around that circle, and then you'll go back three 
quarters of the way around that circle. You'll go half 
way around that circle, then you'll go back around that 
circle.
Finally, the Lord said to me, "Now get out of that 
circle. In fact, stop holding meetings in churches; go to a 
neutral place. Hold your meetings in a hotel or in a 
motel ballroom. Call your meetings 'All Faiths' 
Crusades' and invite people from any denomination to 
come."
Jesus explained why He wanted me to stop holding 
meetings in churches. He said, "One denomination is 
prejudiced against another denomination. Besides that, 
almost all Full Gospel churches are fishing out of their 
own bathtub anyway, and there aren't any fish in their 
bathtub." So I got out and went fishing for men, glory to 
God! We're enjoying the results of that today.
Then Jesus said, "Make another circle. That first 
circle represents your going to neutral places to hold 
meetings. " Then I found myself making a little larger 
circle. Jesus said, "That second circle represents your 
putting into print all of your Bible lessons." We've done 
that. In fact, in English alone, we've published 37 
million books. We are continuing to publish more than a 
million books every year. At the time, I didn't think it 
would be that big of a circle. Then Jesus said, "Third, 
put all of your messages on tape." At that time, we just 
had those old reel-to-reel tapes. Now we put out 40,000 
cassette tapes a month.
Then Jesus said, "Get on radio and teach—don't 
preach." In those days, no one in Full Gospel circles was 
44

Except the Lord Build the House
teaching on radio. They were all preaching. So I got on 
the radio and taught. Each time we'd break into one of 
those circles that I had prayed out, it would work so 
smoothly. Why? Because it was God's plan. We heard 
from heaven and the plan was blessed.
I've given just a brief overview of God's dealings in 
my life and ministry. But He doesn't just have plans 
and purposes for me. He has a plan for the Church. He 
has a plan and a place for each of His children, and His 
children can know His plans and pursue them in their 
lives and ministries.
But you have to get His plan from Him. You have to 
pray it through.
The old-time Pentecostals had a term, "praying 
through," but people misused it. They would say to a 
fellow believer, "Have you prayed through today?" 
Really, if you are in fellowship with God, you don't have 
to pray through, in that sense. However, if you are in a 
backslidden condition, you do need to pray through.
That expression got started because sometimes 
people do come up against forces of evil in prayer. 
You've got to pray through them sometimes. Daniel 
prayed twenty-one days until he prayed through. So 
sometimes there are spiritual forces that you have to 
pray through.
Sometimes you have to pray and wait on God to find 
out what His plans, purposes, and pursuits are. You 
need to find out God's plan for your life, your ministry, 
your church—or whatever it is that God has called you 
to do.
In waiting upon the Lord in prayer, all I did was 
simply obey what God told me to do. I haven't done any 
thing except run to try to keep up with Him!
45

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
Once, a minister friend and his wife came to visit 
my wife and me, and we were driving them around 
showing them RHEMA and all the facilities. They said, 
"You must be carrying a heavy load."
"No," I said, "I'm not carrying any heavy load. No, 
you're mistaken—I'm not the least bit burdened by 
anything. It wasn't my idea or my plan to start a 
training center. I didn't want to do it to begin with, 
anyway."
You see, I had already cast my cares upon the Lord. 
I had settled all this with the Lord and had His plan on 
the matter. Early in our building programs, I told the 
Lord about our financial needs. (The Lord is our friend 
and He is our Father. He cares about us, and He can 
understand us when we talk to Him.)
That's why I don't carry the burden! If it is the 
Lord's plan, He will put you over! " Except the Lord 
build the house, they labour in vain that build it ..." (Ps. 
127:1). And I know God can get the job done!
So what we are doing is the result of what God said 
to do, not what I wanted. It's not my plan or my purpose
—it's God's.
Find Your Place of Anointing
One reason many ministers miss God's plan for 
their lives is that they try to be a "jack-of-all-trades and 
a master of none." We need to realize this—every one of 
us is limited! If you could do it all yourself, there 
wouldn't be any need for the rest of us. Yet some people 
seem to think, "If God takes me off the scene, the job 
won't get done!" Isn't it strange how God has gotten by 
without them all these years? No, it's human ego that 
likes to think that!
46

Except the Lord Build the House
"Yeah, but I'm the only one who is doing anything 
for God!"
Dear me, many times it is the folks you have never 
heard of who are doing more for God than people with 
an attitude like that! You may not be gifted and 
anointed by the Holy Spirit to minister in a certain way, 
but find your place and you will be successful. If you 
don't know for sure where your place is, just keep giving 
people the Word and laying hands on them in faith! God 
honors faith, and you will have just as many miracles!
The late Rev. Howard Carter was the General 
Chairman of the Assemblies of God in Great Britain for 
nineteen years, and he built the first Pentecostal Bible 
school in the world. He was used by the Lord to 
minister some of the clearest teaching I have ever heard 
concerning the gifts of the Holy Spirit. I heard him say 
once that nearly everyone he laid hands on was filled 
with the Holy Spirit, and practically everyone his wife 
laid hands on got healed. You see, both he and his wife 
had found their place of anointing and they flowed 
together in their anointings as a husband-and-wife 
team in the ministry! They learned that by staying with 
their individual places of anointing, they were effective!
When people find their area of anointing and stay 
with it—not trying to be someone they're not—they 
become effective in whatever they are doing for God.
Sometimes God will show you what He wants you to 
do—you will have His plan. But at the same time, you 
will perceive in your spirit that the time to do it isn't 
quite right. Learn to wait for the right time to 
implement God's plan—wait for the quickening of the 
Holy Spirit. At other times, God will show you things in 
the Spirit, and although you won't know everything God 
wants to do, as you fulfill what the Lord told you to do—
47

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
little by little, you will move into deeper areas of the 
Spirit. As you are obedient to follow God's plan and His 
purpose, He will begin to illustrate and demonstrate 
some things to you and lead you into greater 
understanding of His plan.
There will also be times when you simply pick up on 
what the Spirit wants to do through others in the Body 
of Christ, but that does not mean that God wants you to 
do it.
Listen to what I'm saying. If you'll recall, sometimes 
when Paul had something to say, he would say, "This is 
what the Lord said." But at other times, he'd say, "God 
gave me permission to say this."
Please get something clear in your mind: I'm 
speaking this by the Spirit of God because God wants to 
clear up some areas so He can move in our midst. Many 
people who have some sensitivity to the Holy Spirit 
sense what God is doing and what He wants to do. They 
grab that and run off with it and try to build something 
from that. But because God didn't specifically tell them 
to do it, their plans are only man's plan, not God's plan 
or purpose. They add to God's plan or they take away 
from it, but they get the real thing God wanted to do in 
a mess, and sometimes they even thwart the plan and 
the move that God wanted. We can't let that happen in 
what God wants to do in our day in the Body of Christ.
How are we going to keep that from happening? Are 
we going to pray? Certainly, we should pray, but that 
won't do it. We are going to have to teach people what 
the Bible says. We are going to have to get people 
informed. The Body of Christ is going to have to begin 
to follow after God's plans, purposes, and pursuits.
Let me use an illustration to explain what I mean. A 
number of years ago, I announced during Campmeeting 
48

Except the Lord Build the House
that we were going to start a Bible school. Many other 
people sensed the same leading to start a Bible school. 
I'm sure God had probably spoken to some of these 
people; others were just sensing the move of God in that 
area and direction.
After we announced we were going to start a Bible 
school, we received many letters that said, "God told us 
to start a Bible school, but we don't know how. Could 
you tell us how?" Well, when God told us to start one, 
we didn't know how either. We had to seek God's plan 
for what He wanted us to do. We wrote these people 
back and said, "If God told you to start a Bible school, 
He'll tell you how to do it. If He doesn't tell you how to 
do it, He didn't direct you to start one in the first place!"
Then in another instance, I announced from the 
platform, "We are going to start Healing School." Right 
after that, we got letters from others who had also 
sensed the move of God in that area. They wrote us 
saying, "God told us to start a healing school. How do 
we do it? Tell us how to do it." However, when God told 
us to start ours, we had to seek Him for the "how-to." 
We prayed and sought God!
What happened was that many of these people 
sensed in the Spirit that God was moving this way, and 
they thought He wanted them to do it. They didn't take 
time to wait before God to get His plan for themselves or 
for their church.
When people sense which way God is moving, many 
times they assume God wants them to do something. Of 
course, there will always be those people who just want 
to start something because someone else is doing it. 
Most of them fall flat on their faces. Why? Because, 
"Except the Lord build the house, they labour in vain 
that build it..." (Ps. 127:1).
49

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
Once we get God's plan and begin to follow it, it is 
vital that we learn to rest in Him.
What happens so many times is that God really does 
tell Christians to do something, but then they try to go 
build it or do it themselves. They try to carry out God's 
plan in themselves and they do it in their own strength. 
They think they have to perform it, and some of them 
labor under that burden until the strain of it literally 
kills them; they have a heart attack and die young. 
Then you hear someone say, "See, that proves healing is 
not for everyone, because that fine fellow worked for the 
Lord, but he died right in the midst of doing God's will."
No, in that circumstance, if you do all the laboring 
to bring God's plan to pass, and you don't trust in Him 
to do it, you may work yourself to death! Seek God, and 
let Him bring His own plan to pass! When God tells you 
to do something, you need to rest as you go, glory to 
God! I'm resting in Him! The Bible says, "... we which 
have believed do enter into rest..." (Heb. 4:3).
50
