Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
Chapter 10: 10 Demonstration of the Spirit

When Jesus stood with me above the Tulsa 
Convention Center and talked about His plan for 
believers living under the New Testament, He turned to 
me and said, "Demonstrate to the people. After you 
teach, say to the people, 'I'm to teach you not only by 
precept, but by example.' It is scriptural to follow godly 
examples."
He then directed me to the following scripture and 
showed me how my interpretation of it had not been 
exact.
1 CORINTHIANS 2:4
4 And my speech and my preaching was not 
with enticing words of man's wisdom, but 
in demonstration of the Spirit and of 
power.
Notice how Paul said that: "... my speech and my 
preaching was ... in demonstration of the Spirit and of 
power." Not demonstration of power and the Spirit, but 
demonstration of the Spirit AND of power. The 
demonstrations of power are the power gifts in 
manifestation: Special faith, working of miracles, and 
gifts of healings.
However, the Holy Spirit also works and 
demonstrates in the revelation gifts and in the 
utterance gifts. Paul is saying, "I preach in 
demonstration of the Spirit."
So Paul is really saying two things in this verse: 1) I 
137

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
come in demonstration of power, and 2) I come in 
demonstration of the Spirit.
The demonstration of power refers to the power gifts 
in manifestation: Special faith, working of miracles, 
gifts of healings. Those gifts demonstrate the power of 
the Holy Spirit—that's why they are called "power 
gifts."
But Paul also said, "I preach in demonstration of the 
Spirit." The Holy Spirit further demonstrates Himself, 
for example, in the revelation gifts and in the gifts of 
utterance.
We've thought that "preaching in demonstration of 
the Spirit and of power," was referring only to 
preaching with the power gifts in operation, or 
preaching with what we'd call "signs and wonders" with 
miraculous healings taking place. But, no, this scripture 
also refers to the way the Spirit demonstrates or 
manifests Himself.
We could say then, that the Holy Spirit 
demonstrates Himself: 1) in the power gifts, 2) in the 
utterance and revelation gifts, and 3) He manifests 
Himself in demonstration through the ministry gifts.
God wants to bring us to the place where we 
demonstrate the Holy Spirit and we demonstrate the 
power of the Holy Spirit.
We can all be involved in demonstrations of the 
Spirit by prophecy because the Bible says we can all 
exercise the simple gift of prophecy: "... ye may all 
prophesy one by one ..." (1 Cor. 14:31). Another 
scripture that tells us we can all be involved in 
demonstration of the Spirit through prophecy is found 
in Ephesians 5:18,19: "... be not drunk with wine, 
wherein is excess; but be filled with the Spirit; 
138

Demonstration of the Spirit
SPEAKING to yourselves ..." (Eph. 5:18,19). As we 
have seen, speaking to ourselves in psalms and hymns 
and spiritual songs is an operation of the simple gift of 
prophecy or supernatural utterance. So prophecy is also 
a "demonstration of the Spirit."
In that visitation with Jesus, I saw us 
demonstrating the Holy Spirit. In that visitation, Jesus 
not only told me to demonstrate, but then I saw us doing 
it. In the actual Campmeeting service, I only acted out 
what I had already seen.
As I stood with Jesus and looked down through the 
roof of the Tulsa Convention Center onto the Monday 
night service of Campmeeting, I saw myself 
demonstrating speaking in psalms. I didn't hear what 
the psalms were until I was actually in that evening 
service. I also saw others of our ministry team, whom I 
recognized, demonstrating the Spirit in psalms, hymns, 
and spiritual songs. Then during the actual service, 
everything happened just as I had seen.
The following are some psalms which I spoke out in 
that Campmeeting service as they came by the Spirit. 
The other people I had seen demonstrating the Spirit 
were more given to music; therefore, they sang what 
was given to them by the Holy Spirit.
To help those who have never spoken in psalms, I 
will try to explain how psalms come to me: I feel, or 
sense, a psalm as it comes up out of my spirit—out of 
the inside of me. Usually, I just get the title, although 
sometimes the first word or two comes. I have never 
gotten more than two lines. Beyond that, I do not know 
what I am going to say. If I am in a public assembly and 
the unction is not there, then I'm lost.
It takes faith to speak in psalms. The whole 
Christian life is a faith walk, for without faith, it is 
139

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
impossible to please God. If He gave you the whole 
psalm at once, you'd be walking by sight and you 
couldn't please Him by reciting it.
After I speak whatever I have in faith, the rest 
comes by the spirit of prophecy. I get over into the flow 
of it.
I'm sure many Christians have had this happen to 
them in their personal devotions and didn't know what 
it was, so they didn't yield to it!
The following psalms came as I taught in 
demonstration of the Spirit. When I began to speak, I 
had just one word which was the title for each psalm. 
The rest rose up from within my spirit as I continued to 
speak forth in faith.
Yesterday
Yesterday is gone and should be forgotten.
Satan will oftentime (as well as friends) remind you of 
your yesterdays.
But remember that your yesterdays—all that is wrong
—is under the blood.
And all that is good and is right, it will be all right for 
you to recite.
But walk in the light and know that your yesterdays 
are forever gone. And today is beautiful.
So walk with the Lord and enjoy His blessings. For 
yesterday does not exist.
Today
Today is not as dark as some men would have you 
believe.
Today is not as desolate and desperate as the media 
ofttime would portray.
140

Demonstration of the Spirit
Today is the day of the Lord—a day of deliverance, a 
day of blessing, a day of visitation.
For, you see, those who walk with the Lord walk in the 
light.
And they walk by faith and not by sight.
But those who walk in darkness cannot see.
Yea, even the god of this world has darkened their 
minds, and all they see is desolation, darkness, and 
the end of time.
The end of time will surely come.
But, remember, the Master said to us who walk and live 
in this clime,
"When these things begin to come to pass, lift up your 
heads and look up!
Rejoice! for your redemption draweth nigh!"
So today is not dark;
Today is bright, and today is light.
Walk in the light and all of your pathways will forever 
be bright.
Tomorrow
So many are worried and depressed and some even 
almost driven to suicide—frustrated about 
tomorrow.
What will tomorrow bring?
Will tomorrow ever come?
What about tomorrow?
Will I be here?
What about tomorrow?
Will it bring fame or will it bring fortune?
Will it bring blessing?
Will it be bad or will it be good?
Yea, saith the Lord of hosts, tomorrow belongs unto the 
saints.
141

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
Tomorrow can be filled, and will be filled with victory 
even as today—when you walk by faith.
So see tomorrow as a stepping stone to greater success 
and achievement in the realm of God.
Tomorrow is bright, for tomorrow belongs to the saints 
who walk in the light.
Tomorrow is good, for the Father of lights sendeth down 
always unto His own that which is good.
For God is good; Yea, His mercy endureth forever.
So do not feel any anxiety about tomorrow.
Trust in the Lord and leave it in His hands.
Walk by faith and shout above the turmoil.
All is right and all is bright for we are children of light.
Darkness and gloom will overtake any who will yield 
unto Satan and walk in his way.
Darkness and gloom; negativism and doubt.
Fear, you see, dominates those who do not know what it 
is all about.
But those who are enlightened by His Word, knoweth 
that the trial of their faith is more precious than 
gold.
So in the midst of the trial and in the midst of the test 
they sound forth the shout of victory and rejoice.
For they know that victory belongs unto the children of 
God.
They know that there came out from heaven long ago 
the Champion sent by the Father to those who live 
down here below.
And in the world of darkness, He came and said, "I am 
the Light of the world.
Follow Me and you will walk not in darkness."
So darkness and gloom are a thing of the past.
For now you are the light of the world.
Yea, now you walk in the fullness of God and the glory 
of the Father.
142

Demonstration of the Spirit
And all that He has provided is thine.
So shout it above all the roar of the enemy.
Because, you see, all that God has said and declared is 
sublime.
Victory
Victory is not in places and things.
Victory is not in people and man's plan.
Victory is in Him, the Eternal One.
The One who planned the great plan of redemption and 
sent the Champion out of heaven long ago, from the 
bosom of the Father down here below.
And He met the enemy in awful combat:
And arose victorious over death, hell, and the grave,
And ascended on High and led captivity captive.
The victory is in Him.
And if in Him you live and He lives in you, then the 
victory is on the inside.
Stir up the victory.
Shout the words in the face of the enemy:
"Victory!" "Victory!" "Victory!"—every day.
"Victory!" every night.
"Victory!" every moment.
For the Victorious One in me doth live.
Greater is He than all the forces of hell.
Greater is He than temptation and all that against me 
may come.
So I'll rest and rejoice every day.
For, you see, I am the victorious one.
Doubt and Fear
Doubt and fear are the two tormenting twins of the 
enemy down here, sent to harass and rob you of 
God's blessings.
143

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
But faith and love come from above.
Faith and love—for faith worketh by love.
And faith working by love will give you victory in every 
circumstance—will give you deliverance out of every 
problem.
Faith and love sent from heaven above.
Faith and love born of your spirit that is regenerated 
and born again:
The love of God shed abroad in your spirit. Faith rising 
up out of the Word upon which you meditate and 
think.
So cast aside doubt and fear for they have no place in 
you as you walk down here. For He has not given us 
the spirit of fear, but of power and of love and of a 
sound mind.
So cast away doubt and fear as you'd pull off your coat 
or cloak and throw it to one side.
And rise up and walk in love, and act in faith.
And all the heavenly blessings from above shall be at 
your disposal.
And in His great plan, you'll live and enjoy His 
blessings, as you walk in this clime.
And so you shall rejoice and be glad, for, you see, this is 
the day and this is the hour of your time.
These psalms came during Campmeeting, a public 
assembly, and they are in line with Colossians 3:16. Do 
you see how they both teach and admonish us? If you 
did not know what was contained in these psalms, they 
would teach you. If you already knew what was being 
spoken, they would admonish you.
There is also the speaking of psalms, hymns, and 
spiritual songs in the private prayer life as believers 
commune with God. Such speaking is especially in line 
with Ephesians 5:19 as we have already seen in 
144

Demonstration of the Spirit
Chapter 9.
"Well, how do you get there, Brother Hagin?" you 
may ask. "I've never spoken to myself in psalms, and 
hymns, and spiritual songs."
First, of course, you must be a born-again believer, 
having accepted Jesus as your Savior. Then, you must 
be baptized in the Holy Spirit with the Bible evidence of 
speaking in tongues.
As you begin to practice praying at length in other 
tongues, you will fine-tune your spirit to the Spirit of 
God. You see, psalms come out of your spirit where the 
Holy Ghost resides. He is not in your head, and your 
head has nothing to do with helping you "make up" 
psalms. Psalms are not of human invention, but come 
by the Holy Spirit's unction.
When you pray at length in the Spirit in other 
tongues, you will find that from the inside of you, from 
your spirit, a song or utterance will arise.
You may sing in tongues; then you may sing the 
interpretation. However, it is not always necessary to 
sing the interpretation. Just go ahead and sing in 
tongues, worshipping the Lord.
As you exercise yourself in these things, perhaps a 
word or phrase in a known tongue will rise up within 
you.
Step out in faith, and speak what you are given. If 
you will exercise faith in this area, it will enrich your 
life spiritually. You'll move up to another dimension, a 
higher level spiritually.
And when Spirit-filled believers will do this at home 
in personal communion with God, when they assemble 
together, the power of God will come into manifestation 
in a measure they have never seen.
145

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
God wants to bring us to the place where we will 
demonstrate glory to Him.
During the Monday night meeting of Campmeeting 
'87, just after I had shared what we have discussed in 
this chapter, we lifted our hands and worshipped God. 
And I heard the Spirit of God say, "It will take a little 
while for you to change. But after a little while, you will 
see the results. The power shall be manifested; the 
glory shall come to reside in your midst. It will not be 
manifested occasionally, but it will reside in your midst. 
And the glory of the Lord will be revealed unto thee and 
thou shalt be made a blessing unto many."
146
