Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
Chapter 2: 2 Plans, Purposes, Pursuits

As I've already mentioned, when this visitation with 
the Lord began, I kept praying out the words, "Plans, 
purposes, and pursuits."
When that last English word escaped my lips, I was 
caught away with Jesus. I began to see how men devise 
their own plans. Thoughts raced through my mind as I 
considered man's plans: Good—maybe thoroughly 
scriptural—but not God's plans for them.
In contrast to man's plans, I could see God's plan. 
The Lord spoke to me and said, "I bless all of My people 
as far as I can. But the reason there is not the move of 
God and the depth of the flow of the Spirit, and the 
fullness of the manifestation of the Holy Ghost today is 
because men do not take time to hear from Me. And 
they do not take time to follow My plan set forth in the 
scriptures. The more closely you follow My plan, the 
more My power will be in demonstration and in 
manifestation."
Many times, the reason people fail and the reason 
ministries fail is because they have the wrong plan, 
purpose, and motive.
Whatever you are doing for God, ask yourself, Is this 
God's plan?
A number of years ago, I was at a convention and 
afterwards several of the preachers were standing 
around talking. One minister, who was a pastor of a 
large church, said, "I'm thinking about resigning from 
19

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
my church, and going out in the suburbs and building a 
church." Then he said, "I'm going to build it around me." 
I watched the church he built, and I noticed that it 
never prospered. It couldn't prosper because it wasn't 
built according to God's plan. The pastor's plans and 
purposes were all wrong, so he pursued the wrong thing. 
A church ought to be built around Jesus.
When people's plans and purposes are wrong, it is 
even possible to split a church. Then some say that the 
Lord told them to do it! I don't believe God ever told 
anyone to steal another man's church members because 
I don't believe God is a thief. However, when a church 
does not follow God's plan, its members may leave 
voluntarily because they're not being fed spiritually.
That brings to mind a situation involving one of our 
RHEMA graduates, who went back to his home country 
of South Africa to start a church. He began with 
thirteen people attending a Bible study in his father's 
living room. They outgrew the house, so they rented a 
theater or as they are called in South Africa, a 
"cinema." In the process of time, they outgrew that. 
Finally, they rented a larger building and started 
RHEMA Bible Training Centre South Africa. Nearby, 
there was a Full Gospel church and the pastor was the 
national leader of a particular Full Gospel 
denomination. Although he had a congregation of 400 
people, he had to work a full-time job besides pastoring 
his church.
This pastor kept cautioning his members not to go to 
the RHEMA graduate's church. He told them, "Don't go 
to that church because they're in error teaching that 
prosperity and faith business."
The man who related this to me said, "My family 
and I visited the RHEMA church, just to see what it 
20

Plans, Purposes, Pursuits
was like. We liked it so well, we stayed!" In the process 
of time, 360 of this pastor's congregation also visited the 
church and liked it so well they stayed. Finally, this 
pastor had only forty people left in his congregation.
When we went to South Africa to dedicate the 
RHEMA graduate's new facilities, this pastor's Full 
Gospel denomination was holding a national convention 
at the time, and they sent us a telegram saying, "At 
first we thought what you were preaching was in error, 
but we've come to see that it is the truth. More power to 
you! We just want you to know that we're with you and 
we're for you."
The pastor of this denomination had finally seen 
that a church is supposed to support its pastor, and that 
he wasn't supposed to hold down a full-time job instead 
of devoting his time and energy to his own flock. He 
hadn't taught his congregation the scriptural principles 
about giving, but when he did, God prospered them.
Several years later, we returned to the RHEMA 
graduate's church, and the membership had grown so 
large they had to add on to the building! The RHEMA 
pastor had a congregation of about 11,000 members—
approximately 2,500 of whom were black. How many 
white churches in America do you know that have 2,500 
black members! Because of the success of this mixed 
congregation, one of the most prominent leaders in the 
nation called the RHEMA pastor in to his office, and 
said, "You seem to be the only one who has solved the 
racial problem in this country. Help us! Tell us how 
you've done it."
"Well," the RHEMA pastor said, "first you'll have to 
get everyone born again, because everyone—regardless 
of color—is selfish and self-seeking if they are not 
saved. But if you get people saved and get the love of 
21

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
God in them, you can change things in this nation!"
You see, this is God's plan and purpose for any 
nation—to get people saved, filled with the Spirit, and 
walking in the love of God. No matter who you are or 
what your endeavor is, if your plans and purposes are in 
line with God, they will succeed.
Because this RHEMA pastor's plans and purposes 
were in line with God, God has used him to be 
instrumental in networking more than 450 churches in 
South Africa! They are having a great revival and the 
Spirit of God is moving in a marvelous way.
I can remember another incident which took place 
many years ago when I was visiting another state. A 
pastor there had established a fairly large church and 
he hired an assistant to work with him. The church 
grew to a congregation of about 500, and the assistant 
pastor announced, "The Lord told me to start another 
church. I'm going to take 250 members from this 
congregation and start a church two blocks from here." 
Think about that! That's practically right on this 
pastor's doorstep!
That assistant pastor's purposes were all wrong! His 
church couldn't possibly prosper. Do you think God 
could bless that? No! God couldn't bless it because that 
assistant pastor was pursuing the wrong plan. Let's 
stay with God's plan. It will always prosper!
On another occasion, I was holding a three-week 
revival for a pastor who had all kinds of programs going 
on in his church. This pastor had put a great deal of 
pressure on me to find out what it would take to meet 
my budget, so I would come and hold this meeting for 
him. But in all my years of ministry, I never required 
anyone to give me anything. I never told a pastor he 
had to give me a certain amount of money in order for 
22

Plans, Purposes, Pursuits
me to come and preach in his church. I would just tell 
the Lord, and He always supplied my needs.
Even though I didn't require it, this pastor 
guaranteed me a certain amount of money if I would 
hold this revival for him. After I arrived, he raised 
money in every service for every kind of project you 
could imagine, and he told me, "If we have any money 
left over, we'll give it to you." He had a little money left 
over, not nearly what he had said he would give me, 
and he gave that to me. I didn't say anything about it to 
anyone. I just looked to the Lord to meet my needs.
The pastor had me preach every Sunday morning of 
this three-week revival. After I got there, he also 
decided to hold extra services on Sunday afternoons. He 
said, "On Sunday afternoons, we can get people from all 
the other Full Gospel churches in the city to come to our 
meetings." His plans were all man's plans and ideas. 
Then he told me, "If we get people to come from all the 
other churches, we can raise a good offering." Not only 
were his plans and ideas his own, but his purposes were 
all wrong!
Never put money first! The first time the Lord 
appeared to me, He told me, "Be careful about money. 
Many upon whom I've placed My Spirit and called to 
the ministry have become money-minded, and have lost 
the anointing." We don't want to become money-minded 
and lose the anointing of God on our lives!
This pastor's purpose to have a Sunday afternoon 
meeting was to raise a big offering and get more money. 
As we were going into the third week of the revival, he 
announced to the people in that Sunday afternoon 
meeting, "We don't know whether we will go another 
week or not. Come tonight and we'll tell you." During 
the song service, he whispered to me, "I told the people 
23

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
that so we can get them to come back tonight. Then 
we'll tell them we're going on."
Just like someone was standing behind me—in fact, 
I looked around to see if there was anyone behind me—I 
heard a voice say, "When you get up to speak, tell the 
people you are closing the meeting tonight. And you 
close tonight."
I said, "Lord, I'm going to miss an extra offering if I 
do, and I'm going home and I will be off a little extra 
time. It takes so much money a week to meet my budget 
and I have no other income. Secondly, we haven't 
bought any Christmas presents yet, and I have a family 
to support. What am I going to do? I can't start another 
revival—not two weeks before Christmas."
The Lord said to me, "Don't bother about that; I'll 
take care of you." So I closed the meeting and I went 
home full of joy. The next week, the only time in all 
those years it ever happened, letters started coming in 
with offerings enclosed. (I think the most I had ever 
received in the mail at Christmastime was $36.) This 
week I received more than $300. It doesn't sound big 
now, but back then it was. One man wrote from 
California and said, "Brother Hagin, the Lord laid it on 
my heart to send you $150. That's not my tithe. I pay 
my tithes to my church where they belong. This is 
extra, and God told me to send it to you." Praise God—
God saw me through!
I felt sorry for this pastor, though. He had ulcers 
and had requested that I pray for his healing. I asked 
the Lord, "Lord, what about him? What's going to 
happen to him?" Just as plainly as though someone 
were sitting behind me, the Lord said, "He has never 
asked Me for any kind of plan for his life, his ministry, 
or his church. He forms his own plans, and then he asks 
24

Plans, Purposes, Pursuits
Me to bless them. I bless him as far as I can, but I can't 
meet his financial needs because he's putting forth his 
own plans and not Mine. I didn't tell him to do a lot of 
the things he's doing. He just added his own plans to 
what I did tell him to do. He tacks his plans on here and 
there, and I can't bless them. I would if I could, but I 
can't. I can't put My approval on man's plans when they 
are not My plans. And, you see, his purposes are all 
wrong. If his purposes are wrong, then his pursuits will 
be wrong."
Plans, purposes, and pursuits! It is easy to stray 
from God's plan. I believe many times that's the reason 
ministries get into dire financial trouble—they add to 
what God's plan was for them. They may be good 
things, even legitimate things, but they are additions to 
God's original instructions.
Remember, God knows the future better than we 
know the past. It pays in every way to wait before Him 
and get His plan. So many times we make our plains 
and then ask God's blessings on our plans. It's far 
better to get His plan, because His plan is already 
blessed. Get God's plan for your life and God's plan for 
your ministry. If you are a pastor, get God's plan for 
your church.
Stir Yourself Up to Find God's Plan
When God began to deal with me about the ministry 
He had for me, I didn't understand it.
I was pastoring a church, but on the inside 
something didn't feel quite right. I didn't know exactly 
what was wrong, but I knew something was wrong. I 
said to the Lord, "Something's wrong; it feels sort of like 
washing your feet with your socks on." I began to do 
25

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
extra seeking of God and to stir myself up in prayer. 
God didn't stir me; I stirred up myself. I had always 
prayed quite a bit, but during this time I spent extra 
time seeking God with some fasting.
I said to the Lord, "Lord, something is wrong with 
me. I must be abnormal. I've got every reason in the 
world to be satisfied. This is the best church I've ever 
pastored. I've got the most money I've ever had, and 
we're living in the best parsonage we've ever lived in. 
My wife and I and our children are happy, and 
everything is just lovely. The Sunday school is running 
the most it has ever run in the history of the church. I 
ought to be satisfied. What's wrong with me?"
The Lord spoke up on the inside of me, and said, 
"What's wrong with you is that I never called you to 
pastor to begin with. That is not your calling."
Thank God, He allowed me to pastor for twelve 
years in His permissive will. And I learned some things 
through pastoring that I wouldn't have learned any 
other way. (I sometimes think evangelists, teachers, 
and ministers in the field ministry ought to be 
compelled to pastor at least two years. There would be a 
lot of things they wouldn't say or do. Then, too, I think 
pastors ought to go out on the field at least two years. 
They would discover some things about how to treat a 
guest speaker.) But I learned in that time of prayer that 
pastoring was not God's plan for my life.
When God told me He hadn't called me to pastor, I 
should have asked Him what He had called me to do! 
There is something about the Lord—there are just some 
things He won't tell unless you ask Him because He is a 
perfect gentleman. No, He won't intrude upon you and 
interrupt you. The Holy Spirit won't do that either. 
When the Lord told me He hadn't called me to pastor, I 
26

Plans, Purposes, Pursuits
didn't ask Him what He had called me to do; I just 
assumed that since I wasn't a pastor, I must be an 
evangelist. I just fell in line with the trend of the 
denomination I'd been associated with, and all they ever 
recognized were the offices of pastor and evangelist.
So I set out to be an evangelist. And I fell flat on my 
face. After one solid year of "evangelizing," I'd worn out 
my car and was afoot. We lived in a three-room 
apartment. Our son had to sleep on a rollaway bed in 
the kitchen in the winter and on the screened-in back 
porch in the summer. The children were inadequately 
clothed and inadequately fed.
Again, I sought the Lord. Something wasn't right. I 
still had that feeling that I was washing my feet with 
my socks on.
It's a long story, but the essence of it is, God was 
trying to get me to follow His plan for ministry. The 
Lord was trying to get me to teach.
EPHESIANS 4:11,12
11 And he gave some, apostles; and some, 
prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, 
pastors and teachers;
12 For the perfecting of the saints, for the work 
of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of 
Christ.
You see, I'm talking about plans—God's plans. We 
often do things because we think that's the way it ought 
to be done. But take the time to find out what God 
wants done!
Heaven has a plan for the Church in the earth. God 
was endeavoring to get me to move in line with His plan 
and His purposes not only for my life, but for the Body 
of Christ.
27

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
God had shown me the office of the teacher and I 
knew when that ministry gift was dropped upon me like 
a mantle from heaven. Yet when I prayed, I considered 
the circumstances of the religious thinking of the day. 
This was 1949 and 1950.
"Lord, they want me to preach. I can't get any 
meetings teaching. They want an evangelist. They want 
a revivalist. I can't make it teaching."
Yet I could not persuade Him. He had a plan. And 
only walking in the light of His plan could I know the 
fullness of His blessing.
During this prolonged time of seeking God, I started 
a meeting in Henderson, Texas, the last Sunday of 1949 
which was held over into January 1950.
Finally, during this meeting, I said, "All right, Lord, 
I'll teach. I'll give you Friday night. That's our biggest 
crowd. I'll teach and I'll just prove to You it won't work."
We had been going one week and nobody had been 
born again; nobody had been filled with the Spirit. One 
little girl had lifted her hand for prayer.
So on Friday night, I taught forty-five minutes on 
the subject of faith. And I said to myself silently, Now 
I'll give an altar call, even though I know nobody will 
come.
Five grown men came to the altar and got saved.
I hadn't been able to sleep for praying, but after that 
I couldn't sleep for repenting!
By obeying the Lord's plan, in one service, four 
brand-new families were added to this church. In those 
days in Pentecostal circles, if we had a three-week 
revival and got six people saved and two filled with the 
Holy Spirit, we thought we had a landslide! And here, 
28

Plans, Purposes, Pursuits
by following the Lord's plan, this pastor got four new 
families in one night!
After this experience, I began to teach. God's plan 
for me was to teach and to stand in the office of the 
prophet as He wills. I went to another church and in ten 
days' time, twelve new families were added to that 
church. That happened again and again, because I had 
God's PLAN! I was carrying out God's purpose!
Plans! We do things sometimes just because we 
think that's the way they ought to be done. We think, 
Well, this is the way our church does it. This is the way 
others do it, so that is the way we will do it. No! Hear 
from heaven for yourself! There's no doubt in my mind 
that God has spoken to certain individuals to do some 
things a particular way. But they try to pattern their 
lives or their churches after what others are doing and 
they fail! Just because some pastor has a good program 
going in his church doesn't mean that same program 
will work in another church! It may not be what God 
wants at all; it may not be God's plan for that church.
You need to get down on your knees and find out for 
yourself what God's plans are for you, because God will 
only put His approval and His blessings on HIS 
PLANS. God's plan works so much better. If you get 
ahold of God's plan for your life or for your church, it 
will work and it will produce results! But if you try to 
build your house yourself, you will labor and labor. You 
may finally get it all built and it may look good, but it 
will all be in vain because the Lord wasn't in any of it.
If you pastors, for instance, will spend time seeking 
God and waiting on Him, you will find that you will 
become sensitive to the Holy Spirit. You will know what 
God wants to do in your services. You will know exactly 
what God wants to do. He is not going to bypass the 
29

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
leader of the meeting! But if you're not that well 
acquainted with the Holy Spirit so that you can know 
what He is doing, then you are going to be left out.
I have said this many times—I think some 
preachers, even Full Gospel, Pentecostal preachers 
wouldn't know the Holy Spirit if they saw Him coming 
down the street with a red hat on! He will start to move 
in their services, and they just keep on with their little 
programs.
Being Out of God's Plan Brings 
Dissatisfaction
As I've already mentioned, I had pastored for twelve 
years when I began to seek God about my ministry 
because I was dissatisfied. Finally, Jesus said to me, "I 
never did call you to pastor to begin with."
After a period of frustration trying to minister as an 
evangelist, I again sought the Lord. He asked me, 
"What are you going to do about what I said to you 
years ago concerning fulfilling your ministry?"
I said, "Lord, I wasn't planning on doing anything 
about that."
He said, "Well, you are going to have to or else."
I replied, "I believe I will!"
You see, something we need to realize is that being 
out of the will of God brings dissatisfaction. Not only 
does it bring dissatisfaction, but eventually, if we fail to 
correct ourselves, we will have to reap the consequences 
of our disobedience. No, God doesn't bring about those 
consequences; they don't come from heaven. " The 
THIEF cometh not but for to steal, and to kill, and to 
destroy'' (John 10:10). God simply has to allow it 
30

Plans, Purposes, Pursuits
because we're not carrying out His plan. We're not 
pursuing His purposes.
Plans, purposes, pursuits! It's better to have God's 
plan and God's purpose and pursue that. Let's not 
follow our own plans! Let's stay with God's plan and 
purpose, and follow His pursuits! God's full blessing 
and the full dimension of the Holy Spirit can only come 
upon HIS PLAN! We must get God's best.
31
