Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
Chapter 5: 5 Walking in the Light

The reason many churches never prosper and many 
ministers never fulfill the call of God upon their lives is 
because they don't follow God's plan—not only His plan 
spoken to their hearts by His Spirit, but also His 
written plan, the Bible. When the light of God's Word 
comes, it shows us God's plan for each one of us.
A good example of what can happen when a person 
walks in the light of God's Word can be seen in the 
ministry of Fred Price, Pastor of Crenshaw Christian 
Center in Los Angeles, California. Fred was faithful to 
walk in the light of God's Word as it was revealed to 
him.
I remember the first time I ever met Fred. Back in 
the early '70s, we were conducting a seminar in 
Albuquerque, New Mexico. My attention kept being 
drawn toward a nice-looking black man sitting in the 
congregation. I finally asked my son-in-law, "Who is 
he?"
My son-in-law had met Fred Price and he explained 
that Fred was a pastor who had come across some of my 
books. He was so hungry for God that he had read every 
one of them. When he learned that I was going to be in 
Albuquerque, he came to the meeting to check us out.
During the course of that seminar, Fred approached 
me and asked, "Would you come to a black church even 
if it's small?" I said, "I'll go anywhere God says to go." 
I'm not tied to anything. If God says go, I'm going to 
83

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
follow His plan.
So I held a meeting in Fred's church, and to tell the 
truth about it, I hadn't been in a building that small for 
a long time! His main auditorium seated 150 people, 
and he had a little side room where a few folks could be 
seated. So many people came to the meeting that they 
had to stand behind the platform! In the course of time, 
his church grew to about 300 people and he had to buy a 
bigger building. The new building seated 1,200.
Over the years, Fred kept following God's plan and 
walking in the light of it and today, he has more than 
15,000 members. That's quite a little growth!
"Yes, but that's just because God sort of took a 
liking to him."
No, it's because when the light came, he walked in 
it! You see, the entrance of God's Word gives light! The 
light of God's Word reveals God's plan for the individual 
believer and God's plan for the Church!
The reason some folks seem to be just partially 
blessed—blessed only in a limited measure—is because 
they're just partially walking in the light of what God 
has for them. Others refuse entirely to walk in the 
light. For example, I heard one preacher say about a 
particular Biblical principle, "Bible or no Bible, I'm not 
in favor of it." I'm in favor of everything the Bible says! I 
don't want to fall short in any area of the Bible!
Can you understand why God has blessed some 
people only so far? Have you ever noticed that with 
some moves of God, when the waves of blessing come, 
some people only seem to go so far and even then, there 
are those who "die on the vine," so to speak? It's 
because they don't walk on in God's plan. Or sometimes 
the plan that they are walking in is all right for the day, 
84

Walking in the Light
but it is not the full revelation of the Word of God or of 
God's plan for them. Then, too, once that wave reaches 
its crest, if people are not careful, they will ride that 
thing in to the shore and become dry and dead. No, get 
on the next wave that is coming, hallelujah! If you don't, 
the time will come when God will have to almost 
withdraw His Presence, because you won't walk on in 
the light.
It's not enough simply to have God's plan in a 
directional sense. You must also walk in the light of His 
Word which has already been revealed to you, 
practicing it in all areas of your life and ministry, and 
you must continue to walk in any further illumination 
which He gives you. The plan of God won't be fulfilled 
in your life—even though you may have clear direction 
concerning the future—if you refuse to obey His written 
Word.
Likewise, the plan of God will not be unveiled to you 
in a further measure unless you are willing to move on 
with Him and to undergo change. You see, some people 
get comfortable where they are. They become 
comfortable in a particular location or position. They 
become comfortable with the knowledge they have of 
God. It takes effort and often sacrifice to continue to 
pursue God and His plan. That's another reason why 
some people reach a point of stagnation and never 
progress in their lives and ministries past a certain 
point—they're not willing to pay the price to go further 
with God.
Let's never reach the point where we become 
complacent about practicing the Word of God in our 
lives. Let's never get so comfortable where we are that 
we're unwilling to change in order to move forward with 
God. God will always be moving forward. I want to go 
85

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
with Him and be in on everything He wants to do in 
this hour!
Let's walk in the light and fully accomplish the 
plans and purposes of God!
86
