Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
Chapter 11: 11 True New Testament Worship

We must realize that the saints of the Old 
Testament weren't a spiritual house. Israel was called 
the "house" of Israel, and the word "house" was used in 
the Old Testament, but these people were spiritually 
dead people—they weren't born again. The Old 
Testament priests offered up only physical sacrifices. 
Therefore, they were not a "spiritual" house.
Under the New Covenant, in First Peter chapter 2, 
the Bible calls believers, "... LIVELY stones ... built up a 
SPIRITUAL house...."
1 PETER 2:5
5 Ye also, as lively stones, are built up a 
spiritual house, an holy priesthood [the whole 
Body of Christ], TO OFFER UP SPIRITUAL 
SACRIFICES, acceptable to God by Jesus 
Christ.
This verse says that as a holy priesthood, we are 
"... to offer up spiritual sacrifices. ..." What are the 
spiritual sacrifices we are to offer up?
Our Bodies as a Living Sacrifice
ROMANS 12:1
1 I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the 
mercies of God, that ye present your bodies 
a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto 
God, which is your reasonable service.
147

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
True New Testament worship includes the 
presenting of our bodies as a living sacrifice unto God. 
The Bible says this is the spiritual sacrifice acceptable 
to God as a spiritual house and as a holy priesthood: "Ye 
also, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy 
priesthood, to offer up SPIRITUAL SACRIFICES, 
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ" (1 Peter 2:5).
The King James Version of the Bible says we are to 
present our bodies as "a living sacrifice." Other 
translations say that we are to present our bodies as 
"spiritual worship" or as "a spiritual service of worship." 
The Bible calls this our reasonable service.
It is part of true spiritual worship for believers 
under the New Testament to offer our bodies unto God 
as a spiritual sacrifice. When the Church starts 
worshipping God according to His plan for New 
Testament worship—you talk about worship!
Jesus said to me in this visitation, "If the people 
aren't taught about spiritual worship, true New 
Testament worship, they won't get it. They do not know 
about true worship. They know a little bit about 
praising Me, but nothing about true worship."
The spiritual worship of presenting their bodies a 
living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God is something 
many Charismatics know nothing about.
I know because I've been around them. I can see 
why the Lord said, "Charismatics know a little about 
praising Me, but nothing about true worship." Because 
you can see some Charismatics running around talking 
in tongues, smoking cigarettes, and sipping cocktails! 
By such actions, they prove that they don't know a 
thing about true spiritual worship!
When people got over into the Charismatic 
148

True New Testament Worship
Movement, they seemed to get free from everything—all 
laws, all discipline, all commitm ent, all restraints. But 
we can't let our liberty be evil spoken of. G od wants 
transfigured bodies—bodies presented as "... a living 
sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your 
reasonable service" (Rom. 12:1). It is your spiritual 
worship to present your body unto God.
Let's see what else God wants as a part of true New 
Testament spiritual worship:
ROMANS 12:2
2 And be not conformed to this world: but 
be ye transformed by the renewing of your 
mind....
God wants transfigured bodies and He wants 
transformed minds. These are the spiritual sacrifices 
the Bible says the believer is to offer up to God.
Many people are trying to serve God with the same 
old unrenewed mind they had before they were born 
again. No wonder they're still having so much trouble 
with their bodies and with their thoughts! It takes work 
and discipline to renew your mind. It doesn't come by 
simply attending church or by praying, and it doesn't 
come overnight. It requires diligent meditation in God's 
Word, and learning to change your ways and patterns of 
thinking to line up with what His Word says. But 
renewing our minds is not an option if we're going to be 
true New Testament worshippers. A transformed mind 
is part of the spiritual worship we are to offer up to 
God.
The Sacrifice of Praise
Hebrews 13:15 says we are to offer up to God the 
sacrifice of praise which is the fruit of our lips, giving 
149

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
thanks unto His Name! That is a sacrifice acceptable to 
God, and part of our spiritual worship. The fruit of our 
lips offering praise to God is part of true New 
Testament worship.
EPHESIANS 5:20
20 Giving thanks always for all things unto God 
and the Father in the name of our Lord Jesus 
Christ.
HEBREWS 13:15
15 By him [Jesus] therefore let us [What are we 
to do under the New Covenant?] offer the 
SACRIFICE of PRAISE to God continually, that 
is, the fruit of our lips giving thanks to his 
name.
What does the Bible mean by "the sacrifice of 
praise?" And how are we going to offer it to God? Look 
at this verse again: "... let us offer the sacrifice of praise 
to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips giving 
THANKS to his name."
Therefore, the Bible says New Testament praise is: 
"... the fruit of our lips giving thanks to his name."
Let's see what the Bible has to say about the fruit of 
our lips.
PHILIPPIANS 3:1
1 Finally, my brethren, REJOICE in the Lord
PHILIPPIANS 4:4
4 REJOICE in the Lord alway: and again I say, 
Rejoice.
1 THESSALONIANS 5:16,18
16 REJOICE evermore....
18 In every thing GIVE THANKS: for this is the 
will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you.
150

True New Testament Worship
We can't thank God for the devil's work. That would 
be unscriptural. We aren't to thank God for what the 
devil is doing, but in the midst of it, we can give praise 
to God.
When I was just starting out in the ministry, I drove 
down the road many times preaching prosperity, 
knowing that it is right—that it is God's Word, but I 
was the most unlikely candidate for prosperity you ever 
saw. I drove an old worn-out car. In fact, I finally sold it 
for junk; I couldn't have sold it otherwise. I had a hole 
in one pocket and a dime and a pocket knife in the other 
pocket. But I would go down the highway praising and 
thanking God. Did I thank God because I didn't have 
any money? NO! I praised and thanked God because 
even in the midst of not having any money, His Word is 
true and I had another opportunity to believe Him and 
to prove that His Word works. I thanked God in the 
midst of what I was going through.
"Yeah, but you don't understand, Brother Hagin, 
they don't let me sing in the choir!"
Thank God.
"But they never call on me to do anything in 
church!"
Thank God. If you're filled with the Spirit, you can 
thank Him, and you will thank Him!
Now there is something more you need to see in the 
passage we examined in Chapter 9. This time, pay 
particular attention to the capitalized words.
EPHESIANS 5:18-20
18... BE FILLED WITH THE SPIRIT;
19 SPEAKING to yourselves in psalms and 
hymns and spiritual songs, SINGING and 
MAKING MELODY in your heart to the Lord;
151

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
20 GIVING THANKS ALWAYS for all things unto 
God and the Father in the name of our Lord 
Jesus Christ.
Remember that Jesus said, "The New Testament 
emphasizes the individual believer being filled with the 
Spirit, worshipping God in the Spirit." And He directed 
me to these verses.
Do you see that Ephesians 5:20 has to do with the 
offering up of the spiritual sacrifice of praise, the fruit 
of our lips giving thanks?
One filled with the Spirit will be full of thanksgiving
—thanking God for His great plan of redemption He 
sent Jesus Christ to consummate; thanking Him for 
every good and perfect gift. True New Testament 
worship is to live a life of thanksgiving. What a 
difference giving thanks will make in you!
What is God's plan for the New Testament believer? 
To be filled with the Spirit, singing and making melody, 
and giving thanks always. That's true New Testament 
worship.
The New Testament puts emphasis on being filled 
with the Spirit, and on worshipping God in the Spirit. It 
doesn't say anything about clapping. I don't think you 
could clap in the Spirit; you can dance in the Spirit, and 
you can even laugh in the Spirit. Laughing in the Spirit 
will set you free!
Laughing in the Spirit
I was holding a meeting in a certain church, and the 
pastor of the church had been having all kinds of 
trouble. He told us later that he'd been bound with a 
spirit of heaviness for thirteen years. In this meeting, 
one of the RHEMA singers began laughing, and some of 
152

True New Testament Worship
the rest of us began to laugh with him. This pastor told 
me later, "As I was watching the singers, I began to 
laugh in the natural just because they were laughing. 
Suddenly, I began to laugh in the Spirit, and I laughed 
and laughed and laughed. When I woke up the next 
morning, for the first time in thirteen years, that spirit 
of heaviness was gone, and I just started laughing 
again."
That's an example of what laughing in the Spirit did 
for one pastor. But don't just try to put on something. 
Whatever we do, it must be done in the Spirit.
If the anointing is not there, don't try to put 
something on because then it will be in the flesh. Yes, 
there is a laughter in the Spirit and there is a dance in 
the Spirit, but dancing or laughing in the Spirit would 
be the results of being filled with the Spirit. We must 
remember that the Bible does not specifically mention 
these. Yet, on the other hand, we know that the New 
Testament does say we are to rejoice in the Lord, to be 
filled with the Spirit, and to move in the Spirit. In order 
to be classified as true New Testament worship, 
whatever we do must be done in the Spirit.
In the New Testament, the emphasis of true worship 
is being filled with the Spirit, speaking to ourselves in 
psalms and hymns, giving thanks always, and 
presenting our bodies and transformed minds to God as 
a living sacrifice. God considers this our spiritual 
service. This is God's plan for true worship.
What is God's purpose in this plan? His purpose is to 
help us; to build us up! Since this is God's plan, we are to 
pursue it and follow it! Paul said, "... forgetting those 
things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those 
things which are before, I press toward the mark for the 
prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus " (Phil. 
153

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
3:13,14).
There is a high calling for the Body of Christ. We 
stand on the threshold of a mighty move of God's Spirit. 
God has revealed His plan whereby we can enter into 
the fullness of His blessing. It is now up to us to pursue 
God's plan with God's purpose and usher in this next 
great outpouring.
But we must be willing to pay the price ...
154

Chapter 12
12 Paying the Price
The following prayer of commitment came forth 
under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit during 
Homecoming '87 after I had taught on several of the 
subjects covered in this book. May each of us make this 
our ongoing prayer and may we choose to pay the price 
necessary to walk in God's plan—not only His plan for 
our individual lives, but His plan for the world in this 
hour.
Dear Father God, as Paul said, "I bow my knees 
unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ of whom the 
whole family in heaven and earth is named." We bow 
down before You.
Forgive us, Lord! We thought it was too great a price 
to pay and we weren't willing to pay that price.
We thought it was too great a price! But it's not! It's 
not! Forgive us! We've not entered into that, and we've 
not done all You said to do. Forgive us! Forgive us! You 
showed us those things and we thought, They can't be. It 
can't be like that, and we wouldn't pay that price. We 
thought, It is too great a price; it is too big, too much to 
pay.
May not a one of us—not a single one of us—hold 
back from what You are saying to us. Oh, Father God, 
though we don't always understand completely, may we 
dedicate and consecrate ourselves this day and this 
night to do Your will, so Your plan may be 
consummated in this hour—so that the work of God 
155

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
which must be done upon the earth shall be done. Oh, 
Father God, we dedicate ourselves and consecrate 
ourselves unto Your call, and unto Your bidding; not my 
plans, not our plans, but Your plans. Father God, there 
is a move of the Spirit, and there is a work of the Spirit. 
There is a ministry in the Spirit and of the Spirit, and a 
demonstration of the power of God, and a manifestation 
of the Holy Ghost in this hour which You want 
manifested—that we've not been able to manifest 
because some of us have not been willing to pay the 
price. But we will pay it, Lord. We will, Lord. We will 
pay the price!
This will be a turning point in some of our lives, 
Lord. Oh, praise God! Amen. Some of us will look back 
to this night and say, "That was the place, and that was 
the hour, and that was the time." Oh, glory to God.
Some things are hard on the flesh, but, yes, we'll 
obey; we'll do it. Yes, Father. Yes! Oh, my, my, my! We 
get so entangled; we get Your plans entangled with our 
plans, and You can't bless us but just so far because 
they're our plans, and not Yours—they're our choices, 
and not Your choice. May we learn to listen to You.
Dear Father God, most of us know more than what 
we're living up to. Most of us know better than what we 
are living up to. Help us, dear Father God, so that we 
will respond to what You are saying unto our spirits. 
Life can be different; life will be different. Ministry can 
be different; ministry will be different.
Oh, there are many who will be turned completely 
around because they've been just partially walking in 
the light. They've been doing very little, but now then 
they will do much, and they will do more. Thank You 
for it.
Oh, my, my, my, the light will shine; the glory will 
156

Paying the Price
come and it will be manifested. The cloud of God's 
glory, the cloud of His Presence shall overshadow thee. 
The very glory of God shall be shown, and we dedicate 
ourselves unto it. We consecrate ourselves unto it in this 
hour, and in this day. In the Name of Jesus. Praise God, 
hallelujah, thank You, Lord.
May we not hold back in any measure from doing 
Your will. May we not keep back part of the price. May 
we pay the price to do Your will. May we not act 
anymore like God really didn't mean what He said. But 
He meant what He said! Oh, yes! And His way is best. 
His way is best. And in the end, you'll not say, "It cost." 
You'll say, "It paid! It paid! It paid rich dividends! It 
paid!"
But right at the moment, it seems sometimes like it 
costs to completely follow God's will. And with some, it 
may sometimes seem a terrible cost. Oh, yes, Father, but 
our poor natural minds so many times get in our way 
and hinder us. Yes, we'll not think that way—we'll not 
think that it costs too much to obey God. We'll not touch 
that in our thought life.
If the enemy brings a picture of it before our minds, 
we'll just simply say, "Oh, Satan, that is just a picture. 
I've turned that over to the Lord. He has it; He's 
working it out. It'll all work out just fine. And I'll be 
pleased with whichever way it goes and whatever 
happens. I'll be pleased." For Your way, Father, is best! 
And Your way is right. Glory to God!
Yes, Lord, we rejoice in that. We will rejoice in that. 
Yes, I realize that You're raising up many. Oh, my, 
they're just in the beginning stages now. Yes, but if they 
will prove faithful, if they will stay faithful, they will be 
promoted and a stronger anointing will come upon 
them, and it will be increased greatly. And they'll move 
157

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
into a higher place of ministry, for there are different 
dimensions in the same office. There are different 
measures—different dimensions in the same office. And 
those who stay faithful will move up into a higher 
dimension of the same office. Yes, and a spirit of 
knowing will be manifested in a more perfect way in 
them.
And so they shall speak forth, and much good shall 
be accomplished. Yes, the plan of God shall be made 
known. We rejoice, and we are glad.
Pastors are so important in the plans and purposes 
of God, because the sheep must have a shepherd. And 
there are to be more pastors than any other ministry gift 
manifested. And they're so important in this hour. This 
is a crucial hour—a critical hour—we say a lot of times. 
But it is a very, very serious hour. And it is an hour for 
the pastor, the shepherd to be in full potential and 
manifestation of his office; to be in full manifestation 
and potential manifestation of his office. Oh, Father 
God, may pastors be endued with a new spirit. May 
every one of them be empowered with revelation gifts, a 
spirit of knowledge, and a spirit of knowing in their 
lives.
No, pastors will not stand, necessarily, in the office 
of the prophet. But they will be empowered with a spirit 
of knowing and especially with a spirit of wisdom, oh, 
Father God, until those things that have seemed a 
problem to them will be no more a problem, for they'll 
have the answer. They'll have the answer! And it will 
just seem that they have been standing on a ledge, so to 
speak, above the valley; but now they'll stand on the 
mountaintop. They'll stand on the mountaintop. And for 
some of them, their pulpit will no longer be a prison, but 
their pulpit will be a throne.
158

Paying the Price
For Satan is a defeated foe. He'll not win in any 
situation, but he will lose every single time, for he is a 
defeated foe. And pastors shall have much cause for 
rejoicing.
Oh, my, my, my. And may a special unction rest 
upon those who go to foreign fields, Lord, where the 
darkness is so dark. May the light shine even more and 
may their lives be enhanced with Your glory.
And may every single one of us, whatever area of 
ministry we may be in, whatever area of life—oh, dear 
God, may every one of us be willing to pay the price, 
because there is a cost. Thank God, Jesus paid the price 
for our redemption and salvation. But there is a price to 
be paid when it comes to obeying You, and fulfilling the 
ministry that You called us to do. And sometimes, it 
means that we do not—that we even have to deny the 
flesh of legitimate pleasures and things that are all 
right, but we just have to spend that extra time, that 
extra time with You.
Oh, Father God, may not a single one of us forget 
this night or forget this day, but may every single one of 
us—from our very innermost being, say, "Lord, I'll pay 
the price no matter what others may do. I'll do Your 
work, Your will. Your plan shall be consummated in my 
life. Your will for my life and ministry shall be 
perfected. In the Name of Jesus."
Make this confession with me:
Dear Father God,
I am willing—I not only have a willing mind, but 
from my heart, my spirit—I have a willing spirit! I will 
to do YOUR will—to follow Your plan. Though it may 
be hard on the flesh, though there may be a cost, I'll pay 
the price and I'll do Your will. I'll follow Your plan. 
159

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
Your will shall be accomplished in my life, and Your 
plan shall be perfected in the Name of Jesus. I will not 
draw back. I will not go back on the words I've spoken 
here tonight no matter what it may seem to cost. No 
matter how much it may seem to hurt, I know the 
rewards are great and that it pays to obey God.
Thank You for working in my life. Thank You for 
preparing me for that which You have prepared for me. 
Thank You for showing me those things which I see not. 
Thank You for teaching me those things which I know 
not. Thank You for preparing me for that which You 
have prepared for ME. Your will, I will do. Hallelujah!
I purpose to be faithful, to be true, to be dedicated, to 
be consecrated—not just for tonight, not just in word but 
in action. And tomorrow and the next week and the next 
year and forever, I'm Yours! Use me, oh, Lord. Make me 
a blessing unto humanity.
May Your plan and purpose for my life and ministry 
be perfected in me. And it is God, God our Father, who 
is at work within me. Hallelujah. I yield to You. I trust 
in You, and I'll not allow my natural mind to dominate 
me. I'll maintain the vision. I'll maintain the glow. I'll 
maintain the commitment. And I'll not forget—with 
You, I will go.
160

With millions of Faith Library books in circulation, the 
printed page continues to be a major outreach of Kenneth 
Hagin Ministries. The voice of Kenneth Hagin Ministries is 
further amplified around the world through the following 
media: A 24-page free monthly magazine, The Word of Faith; 
an international radio broadcast, "Faith Seminar of the Air"; 
nationwide All Faiths' Crusades; Faith Library tapes; and 
RHEMA Correspondence Bible School. These outreaches are 
vital to the part Kenneth Hagin Ministries shares in fulfilling 
the Great Commission—yet, there is more ...
To receive a free, full-color 
brochure on RHEMA Bible 
Training Center, a free monthly 
magazine, The Word of Faith, or to 
receive our Faith Library Catalog 
with a complete listing of Kenneth 
Hagin Ministries' books and tapes, 
write:
Kenneth Hagin Ministries P. O. 
Box 50126 Tulsa, OK 74150-0126
RHEMA Bible Training Center is another dynamic outreach 
of Kenneth Hagin Ministries. Founded in 1974, RHEMA 
offers a high quality of ministerial studies designed to train 
and equip men and women to enter the Evangelistic, Pastoral, 
Teaching, Missions, Helps, Youth, and Children's ministries. 
Today thousands of graduates of RHEMA have ventured into 
every inhabited continent of the earth, carrying the Good 
News of the Gospel of Jesus Christ—with signs following.
In Canada write:
P. O. Box 335, Islington (Toronto), Ontario, Canada, M9A 4X3
