Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
Chapter 12: The full import and blessing of God cannot

and will not rest upon us as long as we substitute brass 
for gold in the temple of the Lord.
Many dancers and even their ministers will say 
they're worshiping God. But if they were sensitive to 
the Holy Spirit, they could tell that He gets grieved 
with such fleshly display. I've been a guest in services 
where the Presence of God actually lifted when people 
began to perform those theatrical dances.
Besides, have you ever noticed that it's only the 
skinny women who do the ballet and interpretive 
dancing? If that kind of dancing was of the Spirit, 
anyone could dance that way—skinny and fat people 
alike—and it would bless everyone. I've been in services 
where fat people danced in the Spirit and the whole 
congregation was blessed.
You see, when people are truly dancing in the Spirit
—no matter who they may be—something like a sweet- 
smelling incense goes out over the crowd. But when this 
worldly type of dancing goes on, the congregation gets 
to watching those dancing and their attention is not on 
the Lord.
I'll tell you another thing. Christian men have 
commented that the costumes worn by female dancers 
and their body movements while performing 
"interpretive" dances were so sensuous that the men 
had to look away. That is even true of many women who 
dance to the music in church services. I can't believe 
that dancing which causes that kind of response in men 
is of the Spirit of God. I'm just being honest with you.
Pastors are going to have to teach their people to 
bring pure gold back into the temple and to get the 
brass out! Brass looks like gold; you have to examine it 
closely to tell the difference. But God wants pure gold, 
103

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
and we should too.
We do not go back under the Old Covenant and pick 
up their dances to worship God under the New 
Covenant, and we do not bring the brass of the world's 
dances into the Church.
It is important to note that there is not one word in 
the New Testament about dancing before the Lord as a 
form of praise and worship. However, the New 
Testament does emphasize being filled with the Holy 
Spirit, so that our worship and praise is carried out in 
the Spirit. And if you know the move of the Spirit of 
God, you know that the Holy Spirit moves on you 
sometimes to dance in the Spirit —and sometimes He 
does get in your feet! But the Holy Spirit is not 
motivating people who are just putting on a show in the 
flesh.
When dancing is done in the Spirit, it blesses 
everyone. When it's done in the flesh, it blesses no one. 
Oh, it may look good and people may say, "Isn't that 
beautiful?" But it's a substitute for the real thing. 
There's a real anointing to dance, and it's by the Spirit 
as He wills—not as we will. It is true that we must will 
to yield to Him, but the unction to dance comes from 
Him: it's a dance in the Spirit.
I dance in the Spirit very often, but I don't just put 
on something. Unless the anointing is there, I don't do 
it. That would be like trying to give a message in 
tongues with no anointing. We've all seen that. It's just 
dead, and it deadens the service.
In many of our meetings when God is moving to heal 
and bless people, there are just some folks who can't 
discern anything. They speak out or do something 
without the anointing. If we don't teach them, they will 
get themselves and the service in a mess.
104

Dancing in the Flesh or in the Spirit?
I can illustrate the difference that dancing in the 
Spirit will have upon a service as opposed to dancing in 
the flesh by sharing some true stories with you.
Years ago when I was pastoring the church in 
Farmersville, Texas, we saw a woman from another 
church virtually raised up from a deathbed in one of our 
Thursday night services. Doctors had said she would be 
dead in a matter of a few days, but God healed her. The 
following Sunday, she attended our church.
I had this sister testify in the Sunday morning 
service and tell about her miraculous healing. That 
Sunday night during our evangelistic service, she was 
back again and there were outsiders and sinners 
present. I wanted them to hear her testimony, so I said, 
"Sister, stand up and give us your testimony."
She was sitting over to one side in the congregation, 
so she stood up and told how her husband had admitted 
her to three different clinics, but every doctor said the 
same thing: "We can't do a thing for you. You'll be dead 
in a matter of a few days." Then she told how God 
raised her up on Thursday. When she said that, she 
started dancing. You talk about dancing in the Spirit! I 
got up and went to the pulpit and preached my sermon. 
She danced all the way through my sermon. I gave the 
altar call, and she danced all through the altar call. We 
didn't have any rugs on the floor—we didn't even have 
enough money to buy rugs in those days—we just had 
wooden floors. But that little lady never made a sound 
as she danced! Sinners who had come to that meeting 
talked about it for months.
The next Saturday, she told us that she'd had to buy 
a new pair of shoes, and she showed us the pair of shoes 
she'd worn when she danced in the church. These shoes 
had just been bought the day before. She'd danced the 
105

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
1/4-inch leather heel right off, yet no one ever heard a 
sound, and she never interrupted the service! I kept 
right on preaching. I couldn't even tell that she was 
dancing unless I looked over at her. That's a miracle in 
itself!
More recently, in one of our crusades, some people 
in the congregation got up and started what looked like 
a square dance right in the middle of a special song by 
the RHEMA singers! It quenched the move of the Holy 
Spirit immediately. God's Spirit was grieved. He had 
been moving in a marvelous way in the service, but 
when those people started square dancing, the 
congregation quit worshiping God or even listening to 
the singing. It just threw a damper on the whole 
service.
The Holy Spirit moved on one of our singers and he 
began to exhort the crowd that square dancing is not in 
the Spirit. Then the Holy Spirit came on him and he 
started dancing in the Spirit, and it brought the 
anointing back. Again, you see, the people brought 
brass into the temple of the Lord instead of gold. They 
substituted brass for gold!
When you look at the two—brass and gold—you can 
hardly tell the difference, can you? You've got to 
examine them closely to be able to tell the difference. 
But God wants pure gold!
During the visitation before Campmeeting when 
Jesus and I were standing above the crowd, I looked 
down and saw what would be the Wednesday night 
service of Campmeeting. I saw Buddy, my son-in-law, 
dancing in the Spirit, and I saw myself dancing in the 
Spirit. I also saw someone out of the crowd dancing in 
the Spirit. I didn't know who it was, except that it was 
someone who had never danced in the Spirit before but 
106

Dancing in the Flesh or in the Spirit?
had always wanted to.
The next week at Campmeeting all this came to 
pass! Buddy danced in the Spirit just like I saw him 
doing! I simply acted out what I had already seen 
myself do. Then because I had seen it come to pass in 
the Spirit, I said to the people, "There's someone who 
has never danced in the Spirit, but you've always 
wanted to," and I pointed to the section where I'd seen 
someone dancing in that visitation.
A young man stood up and I said to him, "When I 
point my finger at you, the Holy Spirit will come upon 
you. Just go ahead and yield to Him. When the Holy 
Spirit comes upon you—you'll dance in the Spirit." I 
pointed my finger at him, the Holy Spirit came upon 
him, and he took off dancing in the Spirit!
There is a difference between dancing in the flesh 
just because you decide to and dancing in the Spirit 
under His unction. I'm just telling you what the Lord 
said to me; you can do with it what you want. What you 
do with it is up to you. Don't come fussing to me about 
it; all I know is what Jesus, the Head of the Church, 
said to me: "It is unscriptural to dance before the Lord 
in the New Testament. But it is scriptural to dance in 
the Spirit."
I'm speaking by the Spirit of God when I say that 
bringing brass into the temple grieves Him. Jesus said 
to me as we watched some people in the Campmeeting 
services dancing in the flesh, "I'll bless them because 
they are My children and I love them. But I can only 
bless them so far—they cannot have the full measure of 
My blessing.”
I don't know about you, but I'm not satisfied with 
settling for second best from God! I want the best God 
has in every service. I want the FULL MEASURE of 
107

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
His blessing. I want the full flow of God's Holy Spirit to 
be in manifestation, don't you?
108
