Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
Chapter 7: 7 Dancing in the Flesh or in the

Spirit?
When I was caught up in the Spirit with Jesus on 
that July morning, I found myself standing with Him 
above the ceiling of the Tulsa Convention Center. As we 
looked down upon the crowd, I saw that many people 
were dancing. Jesus said to me, "It is unscriptural in 
the New Testament to dance before the Lord. It is 
scriptural to dance in the Spirit."
Dancing before the Lord is done in the flesh. God is 
a Spirit. We cannot worship Him, a Spirit-Being, using 
fleshly means. Jesus said in John chapter 4 that the 
Father was seeking true worshippers who would 
worship Him in the Spirit.
What many people are doing by dancing without the 
anointing of the Spirit is something that Jesus spoke to 
me about at length: they are substituting brass for gold. 
What do I mean when I say they are substituting brass 
for gold?
In the Old Testament, Solomon built the temple or 
the house of the Lord, and he made all the utensils out 
of gold. Later, the gold utensils were taken out of the 
temple, and King Rehoboam brought brass into the 
Lord's house in their place. He substituted brass for 
pure gold. Notice that in the construction of the Lord's 
house, the Scriptures say it was fashioned with "pure 
gold." It was not only gold; it was pure gold. But brass 
isn't a pure metal; it's an alloy consisting of copper and 
93

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
zinc, and Rehoboam substituted that for the pure gold 
that had been in the temple.
1 KINGS 6:20-23,28,30
20 And the oracle in the forepart was twenty 
cubits in length, and twenty cubits in breadth, 
and twenty cubits in the height thereof: and he 
overlaid it with pure GOLD; and so covered the 
altar which was of cedar.
21 So Solomon overlaid the house within with 
PURE GOLD: and he made a partition by the 
chains of GOLD before the oracle; and he 
overlaid it with GOLD.
22 And the whole house he overlaid with GOLD, 
until he had finished all the house: also the 
whole altar [this is referring to the house of the 
Lord] that was by the oracle he overlaid with 
GOLD....
23 And within the oracle he made two 
cherubims of olive tree, each ten cubits high....
28 And he overlaid the cherubims with GOLD....
30 And the floor of the house he overlaid with 
GOLD, within and without.
1 KINGS 7:48-50
48 And Solomon made all the vessels that 
pertained unto the house of the Lord: the altar 
of GOLD, and the table of GOLD, whereupon the 
shewbread was,
49 And the candlesticks of pure GOLD, five on 
the right side, and five on the left, before the 
oracle, with the flowers, and the lamps, and the 
tongs of GOLD,
50 And the bowls, and the snuffers, and the 
basons, and the spoons, and the censers of 
PURE GOLD; and the hinges of GOLD, both for 
the doors of the inner house, the most holy 
place, and for the doors of the house, to wit, of 
94

Dancing in the Flesh or in the Spirit?
the temple.
2 CHRONICLES 12:9,10
9 So Shishak king of Egypt came up against 
Jerusalem, and took away the TREASURES of 
the house of the Lord
In these verses, we see what the treasures of the 
house of the Lord were—everything was made of gold.
9 ... and the treasures of the king's house [This 
was Solomon's own house]; he took all: he 
carried away also the shields of gold which 
Solomon had made.
10 Instead of which king Rehoboam made 
shields of BRASS, and committed them to the 
hands of the chief of the guard, that kept the 
entrance of the king's house.
As Jesus and I were standing above the crowd 
talking, He said to me, "In this Charismatic move, 
Christians have brought the brass of the world into the 
temple of the Lord as a substitute for pure gold. What 
they have is a mixture; it's not pure. Therefore, I can 
only bless My people so far, because they've substituted 
brass for gold. They've brought the clapping and the 
dancing of the world into the temple."
[Of course, we realize that in the New Testament 
the temple of the Lord is the Church—the Body of 
Christ, not a building made with hands.]
Jesus continued, "You see, when you come into the 
New Testament, you find that all praise and worship is 
to be done in the Spirit. " The Old Testament saints 
worshipped God purely in the flesh. We in the New 
Testament are to worship God in the Spirit.
We are living under a New Covenant established on 
better promises. Therefore, we should not go back to the 
Old Covenant and copy what they did, nor should we 
95

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
copy their form of worship.
There's something we need to understand: Though 
the principles and examples in the Old Testament may 
be the same as in the New Testament, the practices are 
not the same.
Someone may say, "Well, David danced before the 
Lord." Yes, he did, but that was in the Old Testament. 
In the New Testament, we don't dance before the Lord—
we are to dance in the Spirit.
Let me explain it this way: In the Old Testament, 
we do find scriptures about dancing. For example, 
Psalm 149:3 says, " Let them praise his name in the 
dance...." You can also find reference to dancing in 
Psalm 150:4: "Praise him with the timbrel and 
dance...." And the Bible says, "... David danced before 
the Lord [Does it say that David danced in the Spirit? 
No!] with ALL HIS MIGHT ..." (2 Sam. 6:14). David 
danced before the Lord with all of HIS might.
Jesus said to me, " David danced before the Lord 
with all of HIS MIGHT." Whose might? David's might! 
Dancing before the Lord was part of the pattern for Old 
Testament worship.
As I've already mentioned, the Bible is progressive 
revelation. David, living under the Old Covenant, 
danced before the ark of the covenant as it was 
returned from Philistine captivity. That ark, at that 
time, was the only place on earth where God's Presence 
dwelled.
God's Presence had dwelled in the ark since Moses 
had built the tabernacle at God's command:
EXODUS 25:1,2,8,17,21,22
1 And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
2 Speak unto the children of Israel, that they 
96

Dancing in the Flesh or in the Spirit?
bring me an offering....
8 And let them make me a sanctuary; that I may 
dwell among them
17 And thou shalt make a mercy seat of pure 
gold....
21 And thou shalt put the mercy seat above 
upon the ark; and in the ark thou shalt put the 
testimony that I shall give thee.
22 And there I will meet with thee, and I will 
commune with thee from above the mercy 
seat....
Moses pursued the plan of God exactly as the 
pattern was given to him. And the day came when the 
work was completed.
EXODUS 40:33-35
33... So Moses finished the work.
34 Then a cloud covered the tent of the 
congregation, and the glory of the Lord filled 
the tabernacle.
35 And Moses was not able to enter into the tent 
of the congregation, because the cloud abode 
thereon, and the glory of the Lord filled the 
tabernacle.
The Presence of God, the Shekinah Glory, was 
manifested in the earth according to God's plan and 
according to God's purpose.
However, because of the sin of the Israelites, later in 
Israel's history, their enemies—the Philistines—were 
able to capture the ark of God.
David, a man after God's own heart, became king 
and with God's help, he defeated the Philistines. Then 
he arose and took people with him to bring back the ark 
of God (2 Sam. 6:1,2).
But the first time David attempted to bring back the 
97

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
ark, he made a mistake. He had the right plan and even 
pursued it with the right purpose. But he did not 
pursue it God's way. In transporting the ark, he 
substituted man's Plan for God's revealed plan. He set 
the ark of God upon a new cart (2 Sam. 6:3).
The Companion Bible has an interesting note on 
this detailing why David's attempt to move the ark of 
God on a new cart proved unsuccessful:
Note #3: A New Cart. This was contrary to the 
Divinely prescribed law (Num. 4:15; 7:9; 10:21. 
Deut. 10:8. Josh. 3:14. 2 Sam. 15:24. 1 Chron. 
13:7; 15:2, etc.) When the Philistines did it in 
ignorance (1 Sam. 6:7) no judgment fell on them 
because the Law of Moses was not delivered to 
them. But David should have known: hence 
judgment came. The solemn lesson is that 
anything introduced into the worship of God 
contrary to His requirements is deserving of His 
judgments. This includes all that is contrary to 
John 4:24, and all that is of the flesh, which 
"profiteth nothing" (John 6:63). All this is like 
David's "new cart" and is sin in God's sight.*
Also, God's Word had instructed the Israelites that 
the "service of the sanctuary " belonged to the sons of 
Kohath. They were to bear the ark upon their 
shoulders. (See Num. 4:15; 7:9.)
On their first journey, the oxen stumbled and shook 
the ark. When Uzzah put forth his hand and took hold 
of it, the Lord broke forth upon him.
2 SAMUEL 6:6,7
6 And when they came to Nachon's threshing 
*The Companion Bible (Grand Rapids: Zondervan Bible Publishers, 
reprinted by permission of The Bullinger Publications Trust, 1964, 1970, 
1970), p.415.
98

Dancing in the Flesh or in the Spirit?
floor, Uzzah put forth his hand to the ark of 
God, and took hold of it; for the oxen shook it.
7 And the anger of the Lord was kindled against 
Uzzah; and God smote him there for his error; 
and there he died by the ark of God.
The next attempt to transport the ark was successful.
David handled the ark of God's Presence according 
to God's plan and David received God's blessing. Living 
under the Old Covenant, he did indeed dance with all 
his might before the ark of the Presence of the Lord.
Later, David's son, Solomon, built "... the house of 
the Lord at Jerusalem in mount Moriah ..." (2 Chron. 
3:1), where the Presence of the Lord was shut up in the 
Holy of Holies. As I already mentioned, much pure gold 
was used in what was then the house of the Lord in the 
earth. Like Moses before him, Solomon finished the 
work.
2 CHRONICLES 5:1,7,13,14
1 Thus all the work that Solomon made for the 
house of the Lord was finished....
7 And the priests brought in the ark of the 
covenant of the Lord unto his place....
13 It came even to pass, as the trumpeters and 
singers were as one, to make one sound to be 
heard in praising and thanking the Lord; and 
when they lifted up their voice with the 
trumpets and cymbals and instruments of 
musick, and praised the Lord, saying, For he is 
good; for his mercy endureth for ever: that then 
the house was filled with a cloud, even the 
house of the Lord;
14 So that the priests could not stand to 
minister by reason of the cloud: for the glory of 
the Lord had filled the house of God.
And again as happened with Moses' tabernacle—the 
99

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
first dwelling place of God in the earth—the glory of the 
Lord also filled Solomon's temple.
The Lord instituted for Israel what He called, "My 
feasts" (Lev. 23:1,2). There were certain requirements 
for the men of Israel in keeping these feasts: "Three times 
in the year all thy males shall appear before the Lord God " 
(Exod. 23:17).
In order for them to appear "before the Lord God," 
they had to go where the ark of God was. These three 
feasts are referred to in the original Hebrew of Exodus 
23:17 as regalim. Regal is the Hebrew word for foot, and 
regalim is the plural, feet. In other words, you were to 
take your physical feet and walk to where God's 
Presence was.
That is why they had to go to Jerusalem to worship 
God (after the building of Solomon's temple). Because 
then the Holy Presence of God was kept shut up in the 
Holy of Holies in Solomon's temple in Jerusalem. 
Nobody dared approach that Holy of Holies except the 
high priest, and he did so only under great precautions. 
Otherwise, he'd fall dead.
But when Jesus died on the cross, the New 
Testament tells us, "... the veil of the temple was rent 
in twain from the top to the bottom ..." (Matt. 27:51). 
God no longer would dwell in temples made with hands.
After the death, burial, resurrection, and ascension 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Epistles written to the 
Church reveal that we, the Church, are now the house 
of God.
1 CORINTHIANS 3:16
16 Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, 
and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?
1 CORINTHIANS 6:16
100

Dancing in the Flesh or in the Spirit?
16 And what agreement hath the temple of God 
with idols? for ye are the temple of the living 
God; as God hath said, I will dwell in them, and 
walk in them; and I will be their God, and they 
shall be my people.
HEBREWS 3:6
6 But Christ as a son over his own house; whose 
house are we....
1 TIMOTHY 3:15
15 But if I tarry long, that thou mayest know 
how thou oughtest to behave thyself in the 
house of God, which is the church of the living 
God, the pillar and ground of the truth.
Now, through His Spirit, God lives in men—not in 
man-made buildings.
David, living under the Old Covenant, danced with 
all his might before the Presence of the Lord.
Today, living temples of the Living God dance in the 
Spirit.
We need to get the difference clear in our minds 
between Old Testament worship done in the flesh, and 
New Testament worship done in the Spirit. There is a 
difference between dancing in the Spirit and putting on 
a show in the flesh or dancing to keep time to the 
music. When you are truly dancing in the Spirit, you 
don't even need to have music. Many people in church 
services are just dancing to the music. Maybe you've 
jumped around a little like some people do to keep time 
with the music. But that's not dancing in the Spirit—
that's substituting brass for gold. You don't have to 
have music to dance in the Spirit.
Neither do you need to have people present to watch 
you dance because your dancing is not a production for 
101

Plans, Purposes and Pursuits
man's eyes, but an expression of your heart toward God.
I've heard about some churches that are holding 
dancing classes to teach people to dance in order to 
worship God! You can't teach people to dance to worship 
God any more than you can teach people to speak with 
tongues to Worship God!
Someone may say, "Well, you can teach people to 
sing!” Yes, but there is scripture in the New Testament 
which speaks of singing in worship to God. Even though 
people may practice to sing in church, they don't sing 
the devil's songs in a worship service.
Also, did you ever notice this? When someone is 
singing, whether they're singing with a choir or singing 
a solo, you can close your eyes, get your mind off the 
person, and focus your attention on worshipping God. 
You can't close your eyes and worship God when 
someone is performing a dance—all your attention is 
focused on them.
Teaching people to dance in the Spirit is no more 
than cheap brass! Can you imagine having a class to 
teach people to speak with tongues! You can't teach 
people how to speak with tongues. You can teach them 
how to be born again and you can teach them how to 
yield to the Holy Spirit, but the Holy Spirit is the only 
One who can give them utterance.
People are trying to worship God in church with 
interpretive dance and ballet. Friends, you can't 
interpret the power and move of God with a dance. 
There's no scripture for that. That's substituting brass 
for gold.
The things of the Spirit can only be interpreted by 
the Spirit. And the Holy Spirit has plainly set forth the 
ways He demonstrates Himself in First Corinthians 
102
