The Pursuit of God
Chapter 7: The Gaze of the Soul

Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our
faith. (Hebrews 12:2)

Ls us think of our intelligent, plain man men-
tioned in chapter 6 coming for the first time to
the reading of the Scriptures. He approaches the Bi-
ble without any previous knowledge of what it con-
tains. He is wholly without prejudice; he has noth-
ing to prove and nothing to defend.

Such a man will not have to read long until his
mind begins to observe certain truths standing out
from the page. They are the spiritual principles be-
hind the record of God’s dealings with men, and
woven into the writings of holy men as they “were
moved by the Holy Ghost” (2 Peter 1:21). As he
reads on he might want to number these truths as
they become clear to him and make a brief sum-

80 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

mary under each number. These summaries will be
the tenets of his biblical creed. Further reading will
not affect these points except to enlarge and
strengthen them. Our man is finding out what the
Bible actually teaches.

High up on the list of things which the Bible
teaches will be the doctrine of faith. The place of
weighty importance which the Bible gives to faith
will be too plain for him to miss. He will very
likely conclude that faith is all-important in the
life of the soul. “Without faith it is impossible to
please [God]” (Hebrews 11:6). Faith will get me
anything, take me anywhere in the kingdom of
God, but without faith there can be no approach
to God, no forgiveness, no deliverance, no salva-
tion, no communion, no spiritual life at all.

By the time our friend has reached the 11th chap-
ter of Hebrews the eloquent encomium which is
there pronounced upon faith will not seem strange
to him. He will have read Paul’s powerful defense
of faith in his Roman and Galatian epistles. Later, if
he goes on to study church history, he will under-
stand the amazing power in the teachings of the Re-
formers as they showed the central place of faith in
the Christian religion.

Now if faith is so vitally important, if it is an indis-
pensable must in our pursuit of God, it is perfectly
natural that we should be deeply concerned over
whether or not we possess this most precious gift.
And our minds being what they are, it is inevitable
that sooner or later we should get around to inquir-
ing after the nature of faith. What is faith? would lie

THE GAZE OF THESOUL 81

close to the question, Do I have faith? and would de-
mand an answer if it were anywhere to be found.

Almost all who preach or write on the subject of
faith have much the same things to say concerning
it. They tell us that it is believing a promise, that it is
taking God at His word, that it is reckoning the Bi-
ble to be true and stepping out upon it. The rest of
the book or sermon is usually taken up with stories
of persons who have had their prayers answered as
a result of their faith. These answers are mostly di-
rect gifts of a practical and temporal nature such as
health, money, physical protection or success in
business. Or if the teacher is of a philosophic turn of
mind he may take another course and lose us in a
welter of metaphysics or snow us under with psy-
chological jargon as he defines and redefines, par-
ing the slender hair of faith thinner and thinner till
it disappears in gossamer shavings at last. When he
is finished we get up disappointed and go out “by
that same door where in we went.” Surely there
must be something better than this.

In Scripture there is practically no effort made to
define faith. Outside of a brief fourteen-word defi-
nition in Hebrews 11:1, I know of no biblical defini-
tion. Even there faith is defined functionally, not
philosophically; that is, it is a statement of what
faith is in operation, not what it is in essence. It as-
sumes the presence of faith and shows what it re-
sults in, rather than what it is. We will be wise to go
just that far and attempt to go no further. We are
told from whence it comes and by what means:
“Faith .. . is the gift of God” (Ephesians 2:8) and

82 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

“Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word
of God” (Romans 10:17). This much is clear, and, to
paraphrase Thomas a Kempis, “I had rather exer-
cise faith than know the definition thereof.”

From here on, when the words “faith is” or their
equivalent occur in this chapter I ask that they be
understood to refer to what faith is in operation as
exercised by a believing man. Right here we drop
the notion of definition and think about faith as it
may be experienced in action. The complexion of
our thoughts will be practical, not theoretical.

In a dramatic story in the book of Numbers
(21:4-9) faith is seen in action. Israel became dis-
couraged and spoke against God, and the Lord sent
fiery serpents among them. “And they bit the peo-
ple; and much people of Israel died” (21:6). Then
Moses sought the Lord for them and He heard and
gave them a remedy against the bite of the serpents.
He commanded Moses to make a serpent of brass
and put it upon a pole in sight of all the people,
“and it shall come to pass, that every one that is bit-
ten, when he looketh upon it, shall live” (21:8). Mo-
ses obeyed, “and it came to pass, that if a serpent
had bitten any man, when he beheld the serpent of
brass, he lived” (21:9).

In the New Testament this important bit of his-
tory is interpreted for us by no less an authority
than our Lord Jesus Christ Himself. He is explaining
to His hearers how they may be saved. He tells
them that itis by believing. Then to make it clear He
refers to this incident in the book of Numbers. “As
Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even

THE GAZE OF THE SOUL 83

so must the Son of man be lifted up: that whosoever
believeth in him should not perish, but have eternal
life” John 3:14-15).

Our plain man, in reading this, would make an
important discovery. He would notice that look and
believe are synonymous terms. “Looking” on the
Old Testament serpent is identical with “believing”
on the New Testament Christ. That is, the looking
and the believing are the same thing. And he would
understand that, while Israel looked with their ex-
ternal eyes, believing is done with the heart. I think
he would conclude that faith is the gaze of a soul upon
a saving God.

When he had seen this he would remember pas-
sages he had read before, and their meaning would
come flooding over him. “They looked unto him,
and were lightened: and their faces were not
ashamed” (Psalm 34:5). “Unto thee lift ] up mine
eyes, O thou that dwellest in the heavens. Behold,
as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their
masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand
of her mistress; so our eyes wait upon the LORD our
God, until that he have mercy upon us” (123:1-2).
Here the man seeking mercy looks straight at the
God of mercy and never takes his eyes away from
Him till He grants mercy. And our Lord Himself
looked always at God. “Looking up to heaven, he
blessed, and brake, and gave the loaves to his disci-
ples” (Matthew 14:19). Indeed, Jesus taught that He
wrought His works by always keeping His inward
eyes upon His Father. His power lay in His continu-
ous look at God (John 5:19-21).

84 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

In full accord with the few texts we have
quoted is the whole tenor of the inspired Word. It
is summed up for us in the Hebrew epistle when
we are instructed to run life’s race “looking unto
Jesus the author and finisher of our faith’ (He-
brews 12:2). From all this we learn that faith is not
a once-done act, but a continuous gaze of the
heart at the Triune God.

Believing, then, is directing the heart’s attention
to Jesus. Itis lifting the mind to “Behold the Lamb of
God’ John 1:29), and never ceasing that beholding
for the rest of our lives. At first this may be difficult,
but it becomes easier as we look steadily at His won-
drous person, quietly and without strain. Distrac-
tions may hinder, but once the heart is committed
to Him, after each brief excursion away from Him,
the attention will return again and rest upon Him
like a wandering bird coming back to its window.

I would emphasize this one committal, this one
great volitional act which establishes the heart's in-
tention to gaze forever upon Jesus. God takes this
intention for our choice and makes what allow-
ances He must for the thousand distractions which
beset us in this evil world. He knows that we have
set the direction of our hearts toward Jesus, and we
can know it too, and comfort ourselves with the
knowledge that a habit of soul is forming which will
become, after a while, a sort of spiritual reflex re-
quiring no more conscious effort on our part.

Faith is the least self-regarding of the virtues. It is
by its very nature scarcely conscious of its own exis-
tence. Like the eye which sees everything in front of

THE GAZE OF THESOUL 85

it and never sees itself, faith is occupied with the
Object upon which it rests and pays no attention to
itself at all. While we are looking at God we do not
see ourselves—blessed riddance. The man who has
struggled to purify himself and has had nothing but
repeated failures will experience real relief when he
stops tinkering with his soul and looks away to the
perfect One. While he looks at Christ, the very
things he has so long been trying to do will be get-
ting done within him. It will be God working in him
to will and to do.

Faith is not in itself a meritorious act; the merit is
in the One toward Whom itis directed. Faith is a re-
directing of our sight, a getting out of the focus of
our own vision and getting God into focus. Sin has
twisted our vision inward and made it self-regard-
ing. Unbelief has put self where God should be, and
is perilously close to the sin of Lucifer who said, “I
will set my throne above the throne of God.” Faith
looks out instead of in and the whole life falls into
line.

All this may seem too simple. But we have no
apology to make. To those who would seek to climb
into heaven after help or descend into hell, God
says, “The word is nigh thee, even... the word of
faith” (Romans 10:8). The Word induces us to lift up
our eyes unto the Lord and the blessed work of
faith begins.

When we lift our inward eyes to gaze upon God.
we are sure to meet friendly eyes gazing back at us,
for it is written that the eyes of the Lord run to and
fro throughout all the earth. The sweet language of

86 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

experience is “Thou God seest me” (Genesis 16:13).
When the eyes of the soul looking out meet the eyes
of God looking in, heaven has begun right here on
this earth.

Nicholas of Cusa wrote four hundred years ago:

When all my endeavor is turned toward
Thee because all Thy endeavor is turned to-
ward me; when I look unto Thee alone with
all my attention, nor ever turn aside the eyes
of my mind, because Thou dost enfold me
with Thy constant regard; when I direct my
love toward Thee alone because Thou, who
art Love’s self hast turned Thee toward me
alone. And what, Lord, is my life, save that
embrace wherein Thy delightsome sweet-
ness doth so lovingly enfold me?"

I should like to say more about this old man of
God. He is not much known today anywhere
among Christian believers, and among current fun-
damentalists he is known not at all. I feel that we
could gain much from a little acquaintance with
men of his spiritual flavor and the school of Chris-
tian thought which they represent. Christian litera-
ture, to be accepted and approved by evangelical
leaders of our times, must follow very closely the
same train of thought, a kind of “party line” from
which it is scarcely safe to depart. A half-century of
this in America has made us smug and content. We
imitate each other with slavish devotion. Our most
strenuous efforts are put forth to try to say the same
thing that everyone around us is saying—and yet to

THE GAZE OF THESOUL 87

find an excuse for saying it, some little safe variation
on the approved theme or, if no more, at least anew
illustration.

Nicholas was a true follower of Christ, a lover of
the Lord, radiant and shining in his devotion to the
person of Jesus. His theology was orthodox but fra-
grant and sweet as everything about Jesus might
properly be expected to be. His conception of eter-
nal life, for instance, is beautiful in itself and, if I mis-
take not, is nearer in spirit to John 17:3 than that
which is current among us today. Life eternal, says
Nicholas, is

nought other than that blessed regard
wherewith Thou never ceasest to behold
me, yes, even the secret places of my soul.
With Thee, to behold is to give life; ‘tis un-
ceasingly to impart sweetest love of Thee;
‘tis to inflame me to love of Thee by love’s
imparting, and to feed me by inflaming,
and by feeding to kindle my yearning, and
by kindling to make me drink of the dew of
gladness, and by drinking to infuse in mea
fountain of life, and by infusing to make it
increase and endure.”

Now, if faith is the gaze of the heart at God, and
if this gaze is but the raising of the inward eyes to
meet the all-seeing eyes of God, then it follows
that it is one of the easiest things possible to do. It
would be like God to make the most vital thing
easy and place it within the range of possibility
for the weakest and poorest of us.

88 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

Several conclusions may fairly be drawn from all
this. The simplicity of it, for instance. Since believing
is looking, it can be done without special equipment
or religious paraphernalia. God has seen to it that
the one life-and-death essential can never be subject
to the caprice of accident. Equipment can break
down or get lost, water can leak away, records can
be destroyed by fire, the minister can be delayed or
the church can burn down. All these are external to
the soul and are subject to accident or mechanical
failure. But looking is of the heart and can be done
successfully by any man standing up or kneeling
down or lying in his last agony a thousand miles
from any church.

Since believing is looking it can be done any time.
No season is superior to another season for this
sweetest of all acts. God never made salvation de-
pend upon new moons or holy days or sabbaths. A
man is not nearer to Christ on Easter Sunday than.
he is, say, on Saturday, August 3, or Monday, Octo-
ber 4. As long as Christ sits on the mediatorial
throne, every day is a good day and all days are
days of salvation.

Neither does place matter to this blessed work of
believing God. Lift your heart and letit rest upon Je-
sus and you are instantly in a sanctuary though it be
a Pullman berth or a factory or a kitchen. You can
see God from anywhere if your mind is set to love
and obey Him.

Now, someone may ask, “Is not this of which you
speak for special persons such as monks or minis-
ters who have, by the nature of their calling, more

THE GAZE OF THE SOUL 89

time to devote to quiet meditation? I am a busy
worker and have little time to spend alone.” Iam
happy to say that the life I describe is for every one
of God's children regardless of calling. It is, in fact,
happily practiced every day by many hardworking
persons and is beyond the reach of none.

Many have found the secret of which I speak
and, without giving much thought to what is going
on within them, constantly practice this habit of in-
wardly gazing upon God. They know that some-
thing inside their hearts sees God. Even when they
are compelled to withdraw their conscious atten-
tion in order to engage in earthly affairs, there is
within them a secret communion always going on.
Let their attention but be released for a moment
from necessary business and it flies at once to God
again. This has been the testimony of many Chris-
tians, so many that even as I state it thus I have a
feeling that I am quoting, though from whom or
from how many I cannot possibly know.

Ido not want to leave the impression that the or-
dinary means of grace have no value. They most as-
suredly have. Private prayer should be practiced by
every Christian. Long periods of Bible meditation
will purify our gaze and direct it; church attendance
will enlarge our outlook and increase our love for
others. Service and work and activity—all are good
and should be engaged in by every Christian. But at
the bottom of all these things, giving meaning to
them, will be the inward habit of beholding God. A
new set of eyes (so to speak) will develop within us

90 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

enabling us to be looking at God while our outward
eyes are seeing the scenes of this passing world.

Someone may fear that we are magnifying pri-
vate religion out of all proportion, that the “us” of
the New Testament is being displaced by a selfish
“1” Has it ever occurred to you that one hundred pi-
anos all tuned to the same fork are automatically
tuned to each other? They are of one accord by be-
ing tuned, not to each other, but to another stan-
dard to which one must individually bow. So one
hundred worshipers meeting together, each one
looking away to Christ, are in heart nearer to each
other than they could possibly be were they to be-
come “unity” conscious and turn their eyes away
from God to strive for closer fellowship. Social reli-
gion is perfected when private religion is purified.
The body becomes stronger as its members become
healthier. The whole church of God gains when the
members that compose it begin to seek a better and
a higher life.

All the foregoing presupposes true repentance
and a full committal of the life to God. It is hardly
necessary to mention this, for only persons who
have made such a committal will have read this far.

When the habit of inwardly gazing Godward be-
comes fixed within us, we shall be ushered onto a
new level of spiritual life more in keeping with the
promises of God and the mood of the New Testa-
ment. The Triune God will be our dwelling place
even while our feet walk the low road of simple
duty here among men. We will have found life’s
summum bonum indeed.

THE GAZE OF THESOUL 91

“There is the source of all delights that can be
desired; not only can nought better be
thought out by men and angels, but nought
better can exist in any mode of being! For itis
the absolute maximum of every rational de-
sire, than which a greater cannot be.”

a

O Lord, I have heard a good word inviting
me to look away to Thee and be satisfied.

My heart longs to respond, but sin has clouded
my vision till I see Thee but dimly. Be pleased to
cleanse me in Thine own precious blood, and make
me inwardly pure, so that I may with unveiled eyes
gaze upon Thee all the days of my earthly pilgrimage.
Then shall I be prepared to behold Thee in full
splendor in the day when Thou shalt appear
to be glorified in Thy saints and admired
in all them that believe.

Amen,

Footnotes

1. Nicholas of Cusa, The Vision of God, E.P. Dutton & Co.,
Inc., New York, 1928. This and the following used by
kind permission of the publishers.

2. Ibid.

3. Ibid.
