The Pursuit of God
Chapter 2: The Blessedness of Possessing Nothing

Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven. (Matthew 5:3)

Be the Lord God made man upon the
earth He first prepared for him a world of
useful and pleasant things for his sustenance and
delight. In the Genesis account of the creation
these are simply “things.” They were made for
man’s use, but they were meant always to be ex-
ternal to the man and subservient to him. In the
deep heart of the man was a shrine where none
but God was worthy to come. Within him was
God; without, a thousand gifts which God had
showered upon him.

But sin has introduced complications and has
made those very gifts of God a potential source of
ruin to the soul.

21

22, THE PURSUIT OF GOD

Our woes began when God was forced out of
His central shrine and things were allowed to en-
ter. Within the human heart things have taken
over. Men have now by nature no peace within
their hearts, for God is crowned there no longer,
but there in the moral dusk, stubborn and aggres-
sive usurpers fight among themselves for first
place on the throne.

This is not a mere metaphor, but an accurate anal-
ysis of our real spiritual trouble. There is within the
human heart a tough, fibrous root of fallen life
whose nature is to possess, always to possess. It cov-
ets things with a deep and fierce passion. The pro-
nouns my and mine look innocent enough in print,
but their constant and universal use is significant.
They express the real nature of the old Adamic man
better than a thousand volumes of theology could
do. They are verbal symptoms of our deep disease.
The roots of our hearts have grown down into
things, and we dare not pull up one rootlet lest we
die. Things have become necessary to us,a develop-
ment never originally intended. God’s gifts now
take the place of God, and the whole course of na-
ture is upset by the monstrous substitution.

Our Lord referred to this tyranny of things
when He said to His disciples,

Hf any man will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross, and follow
me. For whosoever will save his life shall lose
it: and whosoever will lose his life for my
sake shall find it. (Matthew 16:24-25)

THE BLESSEDNESS OF POSSESSING NOTHING 23

Breaking this truth into fragments for our better
understanding, it would seem that there is within
each of us an enemy which we tolerate at our peril.
Jesus called it “life” and “self,” or as we would say,
the self-life. Its chief characteristic is its possessive-
ness; the words gain and profit suggest this. To allow
this enemy to live is, in the end, to lose everything.
To repudiate it and give up all for Christ's sake is to
lose nothing at last, but to preserve everything unto
life eternal. And possibly also a hint is given here as
to the only effective way to destroy this foe: It is by
the cross. “Let him take up his cross, and follow me”
(see Matthew 16:24).

The way to deeper knowledge of God is through
the lonely valleys of soul poverty and abnegation of
all things. The blessed ones who possess the king-
dom are they who have repudiated every external
thing and have rooted from their hearts all sense of
possessing. These are the “poor in spirit.” They have
reached an inward state paralleling the outward cir-
cumstances of the common beggar in the streets of
Jerusalem. That is what the word poor as Christ used
it actually means. These blessed poor are no longer
slaves to the tyranny of things. They have broken
the yoke of the oppressor; and this they have done
not by fighting but by surrendering. Though free
from all sense of possessing, they yet possess all
things. “Theirs is the kingdom of heaven.”

Let me exhort you to take this seriously. It is not
tobe understood as mere Bible teaching to be stored
away in the mind along with an inert mass of other
doctrines. It is a marker on the road to greener pas-

24 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

tures, a path chiseled against the steep sides of the
mount of God. We dare not try to bypass it if we
would follow on in this holy pursuit. We must as-
cend a step at a time. If we refuse one step, we bring
our progress to an end.

Asis frequently true, this New Testament principle
of spiritual life finds its best illustration in the Old Tes-
tament. In the story of Abraham and Isaac we have a
dramatic picture of the surrendered life as well as an
excellent commentary on the first Beatitude.

Abraham was old when Isaac was born, old
enough to have been his grandfather, and the
child became at once the delight and idol of his
heart. From the moment he first stooped to take
the tiny form awkwardly in his arms, he was an
eager love slave of his son. God went out of His
way to comment on the strength of this affection.
And it is not hard to understand. The baby repre-
sented everything sacred to his father’s heart: the
promises of God, the covenants, the hopes of the
years and the long messianic dream. As he
watched him grow from babyhood to young
manhood, the heart of the old man was knit closer
and closer with the life of his son, till at last the re-
lationship bordered upon the perilous. It was
then that God stepped in to save both father and
son from the consequences of an uncleansed love.

“Take now thy son,” said God to Abraham, “thine
only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into
the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt
offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell
thee of” (Genesis 22:2). The sacred writer spares us a

THE BLESSEDNESS OF POSSESSING NOTHING 25

close-up of the agony that night on the slopes near
Beersheba when the aged man had it out with his
God, but respectful imagination may view in awe
the bent form wrestling convulsively alone under
the stars. Possibly not again until One greater than
Abraham wrestled in the Garden of Gethsemane
did such mortal pain visit a human soul. If only the
man himself might have been allowed to die. That
would have been a thousand times easier, for he
was old now, and to die would have been no great
ordeal for one who had walked so long with God.
Besides, it would have been a last, sweet pleasure to
let his dimming vision rest upon the figure of his
stalwart son who would live to carry on the
Abrahamic line and fulfill in himself the promises of
God made long before in Ur of the Chaldees.

How should he slay the lad! Even if he could get
the consent of his wounded and protesting heart,
how could he reconcile the act with the promise, “In
Isaac shall thy seed be called’? This was Abraham’s
trial by fire, and he did not fail in the crucible. While
the stars still shone like sharp white points above
the tent where the sleeping Isaac lay, and long be-
fore the gray dawn had begun to lighten the east,
the old saint had made up his mind. He would offer
his son as God had directed him to do, and then
trust God to raise him from the dead. This, says the
writer to the Hebrews, was the solution his aching
heart found sometime in the dark night, and he
tose “early in the morning” to carry out the plan. It
is beautiful to see that, while he erred as to God's
method, he had correctly sensed the secret of His

26 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

great heart. And the solution accords well with the
New Testament Scripture, “Whosoever will lose . . .
for my sake shall find” (Matthew 16:25).

God let the suffering old man go through with it
up to the point where He knew there would be no
retreat, and then forbade him to lay a hand upon
the boy. To the wondering patriarch He now saysin
effect, “It’s all right, Abraham. I never intended that
you should actually slay the lad. I only wanted to
remove him from the temple of your heart that I
might reign unchallenged there. I wanted to correct
the perversion that existed in your love. Now you
may have the boy, sound and well. Take him and
go back to your tent. Now I know that thou fearest
God, seeing that thou hast not withheld thy son,
thine only son, from Me.”

Then heaven opened and a voice was heard
saying to him,

“By myself have I swom, saith the LORD, for
because thou hast done this thing, and hast
not withheld thy son, thine only son: that in
blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I
will multiply thy seed as the stars of the
heaven, and as the sand which is upon the
sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate
of his enemies; and in thy seed shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed; because thou
hast obeyed my voice” (Genesis 22:16-18).

The old man of God lifted his head to respond to
the Voice, and stood there on the mount strong and
pure and grand, a man marked out by the Lord for

THE BLESSEDNESS OF POSSESSING NOTHING 27

special treatment, a friend and favorite of the Most
High. Now he was a man wholly surrendered, a
man utterly obedient, a man who possessed noth-
ing. He had concentrated his ail in the person of his
dear son and God had taken it from him. God could
have begun out on the margin of Abraham’s life
and worked inward to the center. He chose rather
to cut quickly to the heart and have it over in one
sharp act of separation. In dealing thus, He prac-
ticed an economy of means and time. It hurt cruelly,
but it was effective.

Ihave said that Abraham possessed nothing. Yet
was not this poor man rich? Everything he had
owned before was his still to enjoy: sheep, camels,
herds and goods of every sort. He had also his wife
and his friends, and best of all he had his son Isaac
safe by his side. He had everything, but he possessed
nothing. There is the spiritual secret. There is the
sweet theology of the heart which can be learned
only in the school of renunciation. The books on
systematic theology overlook this, but the wise will
understand.

After that bitter and blessed experience I think
the words my and mine never again had the same
meaning for Abraham. The sense of possession
which they connote was gone from his heart.
Things had been cast out forever. They had now be-
come external to the man. His inner heart was free
from them. The world said, “Abraham is rich,” but
the aged patriarch only smiled. He could not ex-
plain it, but he knew that he owned nothing, that
his real treasures were inward and eternal.

28 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

There can be no doubt that this possessive
clinging to things is one of the most harmful hab-
its in the life. Because it is natural, it is rarely rec-
ognized for the evil that it is. But its outworkings
are tragic.

We are often hindered from giving up our trea-
sures to the Lord out of fear for their safety. This is
especially true when those treasures are loved rela-
tives and friends. But we need have no such fears.
Our Lord came not to destroy but to save. Every-
thing is safe which we commit to Him, and nothing
is really safe which is not so committed.

Our gifts and talents should also be turned over
to Him. They should be recognized for what they
are, God’s loan to us, and should never be consid-
ered in any sense our own. We have no more right
to claim credit for special abilities than for blue eyes
or strong muscles. “For who maketh thee to differ
from another? and what hast thou that thou didst
not receive?” (1 Corinthians 4:7).

The Christian who is alive enough to know him-
self even slightly will recognize the symptoms of
this possession malady, and will grieve to find them
in his own heart. If the longing after God is strong
enough within him, he will want to do something
about the matter. Now, what should he do?

First of all, he should put away all defense and
make no attempt to excuse himself either in his own
eyes or before the Lord. Whoever defends himself will
have himself for his defense, and he will have no
other. But let him come defenseless before the Lord
and he will have for his defender no less than God

THE BLESSEDNESS OF POSSESSING NOTHING 29

Himself. Let the inquiring Christian trample under
foot every slippery trick of his deceitful heart and in-
sist upon frank and open relations with the Lord.

Then he should remember that this is holy busi-
ness. No careless or casual dealings will suffice. Let
him come to God fully determined to be heard. Let
him insist that God accept his all, that He take
things out of his heart and Himself reign there in
power. It may be he will need to become specific, to
name things and people by their names one by one.
If he will become drastic enough, he can shorten the
time of his travail from years to minutes and enter
the good land long before his slower brethren who
coddle their feelings and insist upon caution in their
dealing with God.

Let us never forget that a truth such as this cannot
be learned by rote as one would learn the facts of
physical science. They must be experienced before
we can really know them. We must, in our hearts,
live through Abraham's harsh and bitter experi-
ences if we would know the blessedness which fol-
lows them. The ancient curse will not go out
painlessly; the tough old miser within us will not lie
down and die in obedience to our command. He
must be torn out of our heart like a plant from the
soil; he must be extracted in agony and blood like a
tooth from the jaw. He must be expelled from our
soul by violence, as Christ expelled the money
changers from the temple. And we shall need to
steel ourselves against his piteous begging, and to
recognize it as springing out of self-pity, one of the
most reprehensible sins of the human heart.

30 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

If we would indeed know God in growing inti-
macy, we must go this way of renunciation. And if
we are set upon the pursuit of God, He will sooner
or later bring us to this test. Abraham’s testing was,
at the time, not known to him as such, yet if he had
taken some course other than the one he did, the
whole history of the Old Testament would have
been different. God would have found his man, no
doubt, but the loss to Abraham would have been
tragic beyond the telling. So we will be brought one
by one to the testing place, and we may never know
when we are there. At that testing place there will
be no dozen possible choices for us—just one and
an alternative—but our whole future will be condi-
tioned by the choice we make.

+ OF

Father, I want to know Thee, but my cowardly heart
fears to give up its toys. I cannot part with them
without inward bleeding, and I do not try to hide

from Thee the terror of the parting. I come trembling,
but I do come. Please root from my heart all those
things which I have cherished so long and which
have become a very part of my living self, so that
Thou mayest enter and dwell there without a rival.
Then shalt Thou make the place of Thy feet glorious.
Then shall my heart have no need of the sun to
shine in it, for Thyself wilt be the light of it,
and there shall be no night there.
Jn Jesus’ name.
Amen,
