The Pursuit of God
Chapter 6: The Speaking Voice

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God. (John 1:1)

A“ intelligent, plain man, untaught in the
truths of Christianity, coming upon this text,
would likely conclude that John meant to teach that
itis the nature of God to speak, to communicate His
thoughts to others. And he would be right. A word
is a medium by which thoughts are expressed, and
the application of the term to the eternal Son leads
us to believe that self-expression is inherent in the
Godhead, that God is forever seeking to speak Him-
self out to His creation. The whole Bible supports
this idea. God is speaking. Not God spoke, but God
is speaking. He is, by His nature, continuously articu-
late. He fills the world with His speaking voice.
One of the great realities with which we have to
deal is the voice of God in His world. The briefest
and only satisfying cosmogony is this: “He spake,

69

70 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

and it was done” (Psalm 33:9). The why of natural
law is the loving voice of God immanent in His cre-
ation. And this word of God which brought all
worlds into being cannot be understood to mean
the Bible, forit is not a written or printed word at all,
but the expression of the will of God is the breath of
God filling the world with living potentiality. The
voice of God is the most powerful force in nature,
indeed the only force in nature, for all energy is here
only because the power-filled Word is being spo-
ken.

The Bible is the written Word of God, and be-
cause it is written it is confined and limited by the
necessities of ink and paper and leather. The voice
of God, however, is alive and free as the sovereign
God is free. “The words that I speak unto you, they
are spirit, and they are life” (John 6:63). The life is in
the speaking words. God’s word in the Bible can
have power only because it corresponds to God’s
word in the universe. It is the present Voice which
makes the written Word all- powerful. Otherwise it
would lie locked in slumber within the covers of a
book.

We take a low and primitive view of things when
we conceive of God at the creation coming into
physical contact with things, shaping and fitting
and building like a carpenter. The Bible teaches oth-
erwise: “By the word of the LORD were the heavens
made; and all the host of them by the breath of his
mouth. .. . For he spake, and it was done; he com-
manded, and it stood fast” (Psalm 33:6, 9). “Through
faith we understand that the worlds were framed

THE SPEAKING VOICE 71

by the word of God” (Hebrews 11:3). Again we
must remember that God is referring here not to His
written Word, but to His speaking Voice. His
world-filling Voice is meant, that Voice which ante-
dates the Bible by uncounted centuries, that Voice
which has not been silent since the dawn of cre-
ation, but is sounding still throughout the full far
reaches of the universe.

The Word of God is quick and powerful. In the
beginning He spoke to nothing, and it became some-
thing. Chaos heard it and became order; darkness
heard it and became light. “And God said ... and it
was so” (Genesis 1:9). These twin phrases, as cause
and effect, occur throughout the Genesis story of
creation. The said accounts for the so. The so is the
said put into the continuous present.

God is here and He is speaking—these truths
are back of all other Bible truths; without them
there could be no revelation at all. God did not
write a book and send it by messenger to be read
at a distance by unaided minds. He spoke a Book
and lives in His spoken words, constantly speak-
ing His words and causing the power of them to
persist across the years. God breathed on clay and
it became a man; He breathes on men and they
become clay. “Return, ye children of men” (Psalm
90:3) was the word spoken at the Fall by which
God decreed the death of every man, and no
added word has He needed to speak. The sad
procession of mankind across the face of the earth
from birth to the grave is proof that His original
word was enough.

72 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

We have not given sufficient attention to that
deep utterance in the book of John, “That was the
true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh
into the world” (1:9). Shift the punctuation around
as we will, the truth is still there: The Word of God
affects the hearts of all men as light in the soul. In
the hearts of all men the light shines, the Word
sounds, and there is no escaping them. Something
like this would of necessity be so if God is alive and
in His world. And John says that it is so. Even those
persons who have never heard of the Bible have still
been preached to with sufficient clarity to remove
every excuse from their hearts forever. “Which
shew the work of the law written in their hearts,
their conscience also bearing witness, and their
thoughts the mean while accusing or else excusing
one another” (Romans 2:15). “For the invisible
things of him from the creation of the world are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that
are made, even his eternal power and Godhead; so
that they are without excuse” (1:20).

This universal Voice of God was by the ancient
Hebrews often called Wisdom, and was said to be
everywhere sounding and searching throughout
the earth, seeking some response from the sons of
men. The eighth chapter of Proverbs begins, “Doth
not wisdom cry? and understanding put forth her
voice?” The writer then pictures wisdom as a beau-
tiful woman standing “in the top of high places, by
the way in the places of the paths” (8:2). She sounds
her voice from every quarter so that no one may
miss hearing it. “Unto you, O men, I call; and my

THE SPEAKING VOICE 73

voice is to the sons of man’” (8:4). Then she pleads
for the simple and the foolish to give ear to her
words. It is spiritual responses for which this Wis-
dom of God is pleading, a response which she has
always sought and is but rarely able to secure. The
tragedy is that our eternal welfare depends upon
our hearing and we have trained our ears not to
hear.

This universal Voice has ever sounded, and it
has often troubled men even when they did not
understand the source of their fears. Could it be
that this Voice distilling like a living mist upon the
hearts of men has been the undiscovered cause of
the troubled conscience and the longing for im-
mortality confessed by millions since the dawn of
recorded history? We need not fear to face up to
this. The speaking Voice is a fact. How men have
reacted to it is for any observer to note.

When God spoke out of heaven to our Lord,
self-centered men who heard it explained it by nat-
ural causes, saying, “It thundered” (John 12:29).
This habit of explaining the Voice by appeals to nat-
ural law is at the very root of modern science. In the
living, breathing cosmos there is a mysterious
Something, too wonderful, too awful for any mind
to understand. The believing man does not claim to
understand. He falls to his knees and whispers,
“God.” The man of earth kneels also, but not to wor-
ship. He kneels to examine, to search, to find the
cause and the how of things. Just now we happen
to be living in a secular age. Our thought habits are
those of the scientist, not those of the worshiper. We

74 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

are more likely to explain than to adore. “It thun-
dered,” we exclaim, and go our earthly way. But still
the Voice sounds and searches. The order and life of
the world depend upon that Voice, but men are
mostly too busy or too stubborn to give attention.

Every one of us has had experiences which we
have not been able to explain—a sudden sense of
loneliness, or a feeling of wonder or awe in the face
of the universal vastness. Or we have had a fleeting
visitation of light like an illumination from some
other sun, giving us in a quick flash an assurance
that we are from another world, that our origins are
divine. What we saw there, or felt, or heard, may
have been contrary to all that we had been taught in
the schools and at wide variance with all our former
beliefs and opinions. We were forced to suspend
our acquired doubts while, for a moment, the
clouds were rolled back and we saw and heard for
ourselves. Explain such things as we will, I think we
have not been fair to the facts until we allow at least
the possibility that such experiences may arise from
the presence of God in the world and His persistent
effort to communicate with mankind. Let us not
dismiss such an hypothesis too flippantly.

It is my own belief (and here I shall not feel bad if
no one follows me) that every good and beautiful
thing which man has produced in the world has
been the result of his faulty and sin-blocked re-
sponse to the creative Voice sounding over the
earth. The moral philosophers who dreamed their
high dreams of virtue, the religious thinkers who
speculated about God and immortality, the poets

THE SPEAKING VOICE 75

and artists who created out of common stuff pure
and lasting beauty: How can we explain them? It is
not enough to say simply, “It was genius.”

What then is genius? Could it be that a genius is a
man haunted by the speaking Voice, laboring and
striving like one possessed to achieve ends which
he only vaguely understands? That the great man
may have missed God in his labors, that he may
even have spoken or written against God does not
destroy the idea I am advancing. God’s redemptive
revelation in Scripture is necessary to saving faith
and peace with God. Faith in a risen Savior is neces-
sary if the vague stirrings toward immortality are to
bring us to restful and satisfying communion with
God. To me this is a plausible explanation of all that
is best out of Christ. But you can be a good Christian
and not accept my thesis.

The Voice of God is a friendly Voice. No one
need fear to listen to it unless he has already made
up his mind to resist it. The blood of Jesus has cov-
ered not only the human race but all creation as
well. “And, having made peace through the blood
of his cross, by him to reconcile all things unto
himself; by him, I say, whether they be things in
earth, or things in heaven” (Colossians 1:20). We
may safely preach a friendly heaven. The heavens
as well as the earth are filled with the good will of
Him that dwelt in the bush. The perfect blood of
atonement secures this forever.

Whoever will listen will hear the speaking
Heaven. This is definitely not the hour when men
take kindly to an exhortation to listen, for listening

76 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

is not today a part of popular religion. We are at the
opposite end of the pole from there. Religion has ac-
cepted the monstrous heresy that noise, size, activ-
ity and bluster make a man dear to God. But we
may take heart. To a people caught in the tempest
of the last great conflict God says, “Be still, and
know that Iam God” (Psalm 46:10), and still He says
it, as if He means to tell us that our strength and
safety lie not in noise but in silence.

It is important that we get still to wait on God.
And it is best that we get alone, preferably with our
Bible outspread before us. Then if we will we may
draw near to God and begin to hear Him speak to
us in our hearts. I think for the average person the
progression will be something like this: First a
sound as of a Presence walking in the garden. Then
a Voice, more intelligible, but still far from clear.
Then the happy moment when the Spirit begins to
illuminate the Scriptures, and that which had been
only a sound, or at best a voice, now becomes an in-
telligible word, warm and intimate and clear as the
word of a dear friend. Then will come life and light,
and best of all, ability to see and rest in and embrace
Jesus Christ as Savior and Lord and All.

The Bible will never be a living Book to us until
we are convinced that God is articulate in His uni-
verse. To jump from a dead, impersonal world to
a dogmatic Bible is too much for most people.
They may admit that they should accept the Bible
as the Word of God, and they may try to think of it
as such, but they find it impossible to believe that
the words there on the page are actually for them.

THE SPEAKING VOICE 77

A man may say, “These words are addressed to
me,” and yet in his heart not feel and know that
they are. He is the victim of a divided psychology.
He tries to think of God as mute everywhere else
and vocal only in a book.

I believe that much of our religious unbelief is
due to a wrong conception of and a wrong feeling
for the Scriptures of Truth. A silent God suddenly
began to speak in a book and when the book was
finished lapsed back into silence again forever.
Now we read the book as the record of what God
said when He was for a brief time in a speaking
mood. With notions like that in our heads how can
we believe? The facts are that God is not silent, has
never been silent. It is the nature of God to speak.
The second Person of the Holy Trinity is called the
Word. The Bible is the inevitable outcome of God's
continuous speech. It is the infallible declaration of
His mind for us put into our familiar human words.

I think a new world will arise out of the reli-
gious mists when we approach our Bible with the
idea that it is not only a book which was once spo-
ken, but a book which is now speaking. The proph-
ets habitually said, “Thus saith the Lorp.” They
meant their hearers to understand that God’s
speaking is in the continuous present. We may
use the past tense properly to indicate that at a
certain time a certain word of God was spoken,
but a word of God once spoken continues to be
spoken, as a child once born continues to be alive,
or a world once created continues to exist. And
those are but imperfect illustrations, for children

78 THEPURSUIT OF GOD

die and worlds burn out, but the Word of our God
endureth forever.

If you would follow on to know the Lord, come
at once to the open Bible expecting it to speak to
you. Do not come with the notion that it is a thing
which you may push around at your conve-
nience. Itis more than a thing; itis a voice, a word,
the very Word of the living God.

+ OF

Lord, teach me to listen. The times are noisy and my
ears are weary with the thousand raucous sounds
which continuously assault them. Give me the spirit
of the boy Samuel when he said to Thee, “Speak,
for Thy servant heareth.” Let me hear Thee speaking
in my heart. Let me get used to the sound of Thy
voice, that its tones may be familiar when the
sounds of earth die away and the only sound
will be the music of Thy speaking voice.
Amen.
