The Pursuit of God
Chapter 1: Following Hard after God

My soul followeth hard after thee: thy right hand
upholdeth me. (Psalm 63:8)

hristian theology teaches the doctrine of

prevenient grace, which, briefly stated,
means that before a man can seek God, God must
first have sought the man.

Before a sinful man can think a right thought of
God, there must have been a work of enlighten-
ment done within him. Imperfect it may be, but a
true work nonetheless, and the secret cause of all
desiring and seeking and praying which may fol-
low.

We pursue God because, and only because, He
has first put an urge within us that spurs us to the
pursuit. “No man can come to me,” said our Lord,
“except the Father which hath sent me draw him”

11

12. THE PURSUIT OF GOD

John 6:44), and it is by this prevenient drawing
that God takes from us every vestige of credit for
the act of coming. The impulse to pursue God
originates with God, but the outworking of that
impulse is our following hard after Him. All the
time we are pursuing Him we are already in His
hand: “Thy right hand upholdeth me.”

In this divine “upholding” and human “follow-
ing” there is no contradiction. All is of God, for as
von Higel teaches, God is always previous. In prac-
tice, however, (that is, where God’s previous work-
ing meets man’s present response) man must
pursue God. On our part there must be positive re-
ciprocation if this secret drawing of God is to even-
tuate in identifiable experience of the Divine. In the
warm language of personal feeling, this is stated in
Psalm 42;1-2: “As the hart panteth after the water
brooks, so panteth my soul after thee, O God. My
soul thirsteth for God, for the living God: when
shall I come and appear before God?” This is deep
calling unto deep, and the longing heart will under-
stand it.

The doctrine of justification by faith—a biblical
truth, and a blessed relief from sterile legalism and
unavailing self-effort—has in our time fallen into
evil company and been interpreted by many in
such a manner as actually to bar men from the
knowledge of God. The whole transaction of reli-
gious conversion has been made mechanical and
spiritless. Faith may now be exercised without a jar
to the moral life and without embarrassment to the
Adamic ego. Christ may be “received” without cre-

FOLLOWING HARD AFTER GOD 13

ating any special love for Him in the soul of the re-
ceiver. The man is “saved,” but he is not hungry nor
thirsty after God. In fact, he is specifically taught to
be satisfied and is encouraged to be content with lit-
tle.

The modem scientist has lost God amid the won-
ders of His world; we Christians are in real danger
of losing God amid the wonders of His Word. We
have almost forgotten that God is a person and, as
such, can be cultivated as any person can. It is inher-
entin personality to be able to know other personal-
ities, but full knowledge of one personality by
another cannot be achieved in one encounter. It is
only after long and loving mental intercourse that
the fuil possibilities of both can be explored.

All social intercourse between human beings is a
response of personality to personality, grading up-
ward from the most casual brush between man and
man to the fullest, most intimate communion of
which the human soul is capable. Religion, so far as
it is genuine, is in essence the response of created
personalities to the creating personality, God. “This
is life eternal, that they might know thee the only
true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent”
ohn 17:3).

God is a person, and in the deep of His mighty
nature He thinks, wills, enjoys, feels, loves, desires
and suffers as any other person may. In making
Himself known to us He stays by the familiar pat-
tern of personality. He communicates with us
through the avenues of our minds, our wills and
our emotions. The continuous and unembarrassed

14 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

interchange of love and thought between God and.
the soul of the redeemed man is the throbbing heart
of New Testament religion.

This intercourse between God and the soul is
known to usin conscious personal awareness. It is
personal: it does not come through the body of
believers, as such, but is known to the individual,
and to the body through the individuals which
compose it, It is conscious: it does not stay below
the threshold of consciousness and work there
unknown to the soul (as, for instance, infant bap-
tism is thought by some to do), but comes within
the field of awareness where the man can know it
as he knows any other fact of experience.

You and J are in little (our sins excepted) what
God is in large. Being made in His image we have
within us the capacity to know Him. In our sins we
lack only the power. The moment the Spirit has
quickened us to life in regeneration our whole be-
ing senses its kinship to God and leaps up in joyous
recognition. That is the heavenly birth without
which we cannot see the kingdom of God. It is,
however, not an end but an inception, for now be-
gins the glorious pursuit, the heart's happy explora-
tion of the infinite riches of the Godhead. That is
where we begin, I say, but where we stop no man
has yet discovered, for there is in the awful and
mysterious depths of the Triune God neither limit
nor end.

Shoreless Ocean, who can sound
Thee?

FOLLOWING HARD AFTERGOD 15

Thine own eternity is round Thee,
Majesty divine!

To have found God and still to pursue Him is
the soul's paradox of love, scorned indeed by the
too easily satisfied religionist, but justified in
happy experience by the children of the burning
heart. St. Bernard stated this holy paradox in a
musical quatrain that will be instantly understood
by every worshiping soul:

We taste Thee, O Thou Living Bread,
And long to feast upon Thee still:
We drink of Thee, the Fountainhead
And thirst our souls from Thee to
fill.

Come near to the holy men and women of the
past and you will soon feel the heat of their desire
after God. They mourned for Him, they prayed and
wrestled and sought for Him day and night, in sea-
son and out, and when they had found Him the
finding was all the sweeter for the long seeking.
Moses used the fact that he knew God as an argu-
ment for knowing Him better. “Now therefore, I
pray thee, if I have found grace in thy sight, shew
me now thy way, that I may know thee, that I may
find grace in thy sight” (Exodus 33:13); and from
there he rose to make the daring request, “I beseech
thee, shew me thy glory” (33:18). God was frankly
pleased by this display of ardor, and the next day
called Moses into the mount, and there in solemn
procession made all His glory pass before him.

16 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

David's life was a torrent of spiritual desire, and
his psalms ring with the cry of the seeker and the
glad shout of the finder. Paul confessed the main-
spring of his life to be his burning desire after Christ.
“That I may know him’ (Philippians 3:10), was the
goal of his heart, and to this he sacrificed every-
thing. “Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss
for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus
my Lord: for whom I have suffered the loss of all
things, and do count them but dung, that I may win
Christ” (3:8).

Hymnody is sweet with the longing after God,
the God whom, while the singer seeks, he knows
he has already found. “His track I see and I'll pur-
sue,” sang our fathers only a short generation ago,
but that song is heard no more in the great con-
gregation. How tragic that we in this dark day
have had our seeking done for us by our teachers.
Everything is made to center upon the initial act
of “accepting” Christ (a term, incidentally, which
is not found in the Bible) and we are not expected
thereafter to crave any further revelation of God
to our souls. We have been snared in the coils of a
spurious logic which insists that if we have found
Him, we need no more seek Him. This is set be-
fore us as the last word in orthodoxy, and it is
taken for granted that no Bible-taught Christian
ever believed otherwise. Thus the whole testi-
mony of the worshiping, seeking, singing church
on that subject is crisply set aside. The experien-
tial heart-theology of a grand army of fragrant
saints is rejected in favor of a smug interpretation

FOLLOWING HARD AFTER GOD 17

of Scripture which would certainly have sounded
strange to an Augustine, a Rutherford or a
Brainerd.

In the midst of this great chill there are some, I
rejoice to acknowledge, who will not be content
with shallow logic. They will admit the force of
the argument, and then turn away with tears to
hunt some lonely place and pray, “O God, show
me Thy glory.” They want to taste, to touch with
their hearts, to see with their inner eyes the won-
der that is God.

I want deliberately to encourage this mighty
longing after God. The lack of it has brought us to
our present low estate. The stiff and wooden
quality about our religious lives is a result of our
lack of holy desire. Complacency is a deadly foe of
all spiritual growth. Acute desire must be present
or there will be no manifestation of Christ to His
people. He waits to be wanted. Too bad that with
many of us He waits so long, so very long, in vain.

Every age has its own characteristics. Right now
we are in an age of religious complexity. The sim-
plicity which is in Christ is rarely found among us.
In its stead are programs, methods, organizations
and a world of nervous activities which occupy
time and attention but can never satisfy the longing
of the heart. The shallowness of our inner experi-
ence, the hollowness of our worship and that ser-
vile imitation of the world which marks our
promotional methods alll testify that we, in this day,
know God only imperfectly, and the peace of God
scarcely at all.

18 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

If we would find God amid all the religious ex-
ternals, we must first determine to find Him, and
then proceed in the way of simplicity. Now, as al-
ways, God discovers Himself to “babes” and hides
Himself in thick darkness from the wise and the
prudent. We must simplify our approach to Him.
We must strip down to essentials (and they will
be found to be blessedly few). We must put away
all effort to impress, and come with the guileless
candor of childhood. If we do this, without doubt
God will quickly respond.

When religion has said its last word, there is little
that we need other than God Himself. The evil habit
of seeking God-and effectively prevents us from
finding God in full revelation. In the and lies our
great woe. If we omit the and we shall soon find
God, and in Him we shall find that for which we
have all our lives been secretly longing.

We need not fear that in seeking God only we
may narrow our lives or restrict the motions of
our expanding hearts. The opposite is true. We
can well afford to make God our All, to concen-
trate, to sacrifice the many for the One.

The author of the quaint old English classic, The
Cloud of Unknowing, teaches us how to do this.

“Lift up thine heart unto God with a meek
stirring of love; and mean Himself, and none
of His goods. And thereto, look thee loath to
think on aught but God Himself. So that
nought work in thy wit, nor in thy will, but
only God Himself. This is the work of the
soul that most pleaseth God.”

FOLLOWING HARD AFTER GOD 19

Again, he recommends that in prayer we prac-
tice a further stripping down of everything, even
of our theology. “For it sufficeth enough, a naked
intent direct unto God without any other cause
than Himself.” Yet underneath all his thinking lay
the broad foundation of New Testament truth, for
he explains that by “Himself” he means “God that
made thee, and bought thee, and that graciously
called thee, to thy degree.” And he is all for sim-
plicity: If we would have religion “lapped and
folden in one word, for that thou shouldest have
better hold thereupon, take thee but a little word
of one syllable: for so it is better than of two, for
even the shorter it is the better it accordeth with
the work of the Spirit. And such a word is this
word GOD or this word LOVE.”

When the Lord divided Canaan among the tribes
of Israel, Levi received no share of the land. God
said to him simply, “I am thy part and thine inheri-
tance,” and by those words made him richer than
all his brethren, richer than all the kings and rajas
who have ever lived in the world. And there is a
spiritual principle here, a principle still valid for ev-
ery priest of the Most High God.

The man who has God for his treasure has all
things in One. Many ordinary treasures may be
denied him, or if he is allowed to have them, the
enjoyment of them will be so tempered that they
will never be necessary to his happiness. Or if he
must see them go, one after one, he will scarcely
feel a sense of loss, for having the Source of all
things he has in One all satisfaction, all pleasure,

20 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

all delight. Whatever he may lose he has actually
lost nothing, for he now has it all in One, and he
has it purely, legitimately and forever.

OF

O God, I have tasted Thy goodness, and it has both
satisfied me and made me thirsty for more. lam
painfully conscious of my need of further grace.

lam ashamed of my lack of desire. O God, the Triune

God, I want to want Thee; I long to be filled with

longing; I thirst to be made more thirsty still.

Show me Thy glory, I pray Thee, that so I may

know Thee indeed. Begin in mercy a new work
of love within me. Say to my soul, “Rise up, my
love, my fair one, and come away.” Then give me
grace to rise and follow Thee up from this misty

lowland where I have wandered so long.
In Jesus’ name.
Amen.
