The Pursuit of God
Chapter 3: Removing the Veil

Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into
the holiest by the blood of Jesus. (Hebrews 10:19)

A= the famous sayings of the church fa-
thers, none is better known than Augus-

tine’s, “Thou hast formed us for Thyself, and our
hearts are restless till they find rest in Thee.”

The great saint states here in few words the origin
and interior history of the human race. God made
us for Himself—this is the only explanation that sat-
isfies the heart of a thinking man, whatever his wild
reason may say. Should faulty education and per-
verse reasoning lead a man to conclude otherwise,
there is little that any Christian can do for him. For
such a man I have no message. My appeal is ad-
dressed to those who have been previously taught
in secret by the wisdom of God. I speak to thirsty
hearts whose longings have been wakened by the
touch of God within them, and such as they need

31

32 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

no reasoned proof. Their restless hearts furnish all
the proof they need.

God formed us for Himself. The Shorter Catechism,
“Agreed upon by the Reverend Assembly of Di-
vines at Westminster,” as the old New England
Primer has it, asks the ancient questions what and
why and answers them in one short sentence hardly
matched in any uninspired work. “Question: What
is the chief end of man? Answer: Man's chief end is
to glorify God and enjoy Him forever.” With this
agree the four and twenty elders who fall on their
faces to worship Him that liveth forever and ever,
saying, “Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory
and honour and power: for thou hast created all
things, and for thy pleasure they are and were cre-
ated” (Revelation 4:11).

God formed us for His pleasure, and so formed
us that we, as well as He, can, in divine communion,
enjoy the sweet and mysterious mingling of kin-
dred personalities. He meant us to see Him and live
with Him and draw our life from His smile. But we
have been guilty of that “foul revolt” of which Mil-
ton speaks when describing the rebellion of Satan
and his hosts. We have broken with God. We have
ceased to obey Him or love Him, and in guilt and
fear have fled as far as possible from His presence.

Yet, who can flee from His presence when the
heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain
Him? when as the wisdom of Solomon testifies,
“the Spirit of the Lord filleth the world’? The omni-
presence of the Lord is one thing and is a solemn
fact necessary to His perfection. The manifest Pres-

REMOVING THE VEIL 33

ence is another thing altogether, and from that
Presence we have fled, like Adam, to hide among
the trees of the garden, or like Peter, to shrink away
crying, “Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, O
Lord” (Luke 5:8).

So the life of man upon the earth is a life away
from the Presence, wrenched loose from that
“blissful center” which is our right and proper
dwelling place, our first estate which we kept not,
the loss of which is the cause of our unceasing
restlessness.

The whole work of God in redemption is to undo
the tragic effects of that foul revolt, and to bring us
back again into right and eternal relationship with
Himself. This requires that our sins be disposed of
satisfactorily, that a full reconciliation be effected
and the way opened for us to return again into con-
scious communion with God and to live again in
the Presence as before. Then by His prevenient
working within us He moves us to return. This first
comes to our notice when our restless hearts feel a
yearning for the presence of God and we say within
ourselves, “I will arise and go to my Father.” That is
the first step, and as the Chinese sage Lao-tze has
said, “The journey of a thousand miles begins with
a first step.”

The interior journey of the soul from the wilds
of sin into the enjoyed presence of God is beauti-
fully illustrated in the Old Testament tabernacle.
The returning sinner first entered the outer court
where he offered a blood sacrifice on the brazen
altar and washed himself in the laver that stood

34 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

near it. Then he passed through a veil into the
holy place where no natural light could come, but
the golden candlestick which spoke of Jesus, the
Light of the World, threw its soft glow over all.
There also was the shewbread to tell of Jesus, the
Bread of Life, and the altar of incense, a figure of
unceasing prayer.

Though the worshiper had enjoyed so much, still
he had not yet entered the presence of God. An-
other veil separated from the Holy of Holies where
above the mercy seat dwelt the very God Himself in
awful and glorious manifestation. While the taber-
nacle stood, only the high priest could enter there,
and that but once a year, with blood which he of-
fered for his sins and the sins of the people. It was
this last veil which was rent when our Lord gave up
the ghost on Calvary, and the sacred writer explains
that this rending of the veil opened the way for ev-
ery worshiper in the world to come by the new and
living way straight into the divine Presence.

Everything in the New Testament accords with
this Old Testament picture. Ransomed men need
no longer pause in fear to enter the Holy of
Holies. God wills that we should push on into His
presence and live our whole life there. This is to be
known to us in conscious experience. It is more
than a doctrine to be held; it is a life to be enjoyed
every moment of every day.

This Flame of the Presence was the beating heart
of the Levitical order. Without it all the appoint-
ments of the tabernacle were characters of some un-
known language, having no meaning for Israel or

REMOVING THE VEIL 35

for us. The greatest fact of the tabernacle was that Je-
hovah was there; a Presence was waiting within the
veil.

Similarly, the presence of God is the central fact of
Christianity. At the heart of the Christian message is
God Himself waiting for His redeemed children to
push in to conscious awareness of His presence.
That type of Christianity which happens now to be
the vogue knows this Presence only in theory. It
fails to stress the Christian’s privilege of present re-
alization. According to its teachings we are in the
presence of God positionally, and nothing is said
about the need to experience that Presence actually.
The fiery urge that drove men like McCheyne is
wholly missing. And the present generation of
Christians measures itself by this imperfect rule. Ig-
noble contentment takes the place of burning zeal.
We are satisfied to rest in our judicial possessions
and, for the most part, we bother ourselves very lit-
tle about the absence of personal experience.

Who is this within the veil who dwells in fiery
manifestations? It is none other than God Himself.

“One God, the Father Almighty, Maker of
heaven and earth, and of all things visible and
invisible.” It is “one Lord Jesus Christ, the only
begotten Son of God; begotten of His Father
before all worlds, God. of God, Light of Light,
Very God of Very God; begotten, not made;
being of one substance with the Father.”

And it is “the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of
life, Who proceedeth from the Father and the Son,

36 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

Who with the Father and the Son together is wor-
shiped and glorified.” Yet this holy Trinity is one
God, for

“we worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity
in Unity; neither confounding the Persons,
nor dividing the Substance. For there is one
Person of the Father, another of the Son, and
another of the Holy Ghost. But the Godhead
of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, is all one: the glory equal and the
majesty co-eternal.”

So in part run the ancient creeds, and so the in-
spired Word declares.

Behind the veil is God, that God after whom
the world, with strange inconsistency, has felt, “if
haply they might .. . find him” (Acts 17:27). He
has discovered Himself to some extent in nature,
but more perfectly in the Incarnation. Now He
waits to show Himself in ravishing fullness to the
humble of soul and the pure in heart.

The world is perishing for lack of the knowledge
of God and the Church is famishing for want of His
presence. The instant cure of most of our religious
ills would be to enter the Presence in spiritual expe-
rience, to become suddenly aware that we are in
God and God is in us. This would lift us out of our
pitiful narrowness and cause our hearts to be en-
larged. This would burn away the impurities from
our lives as the bugs and fungi were burned away
by the fire that dwelt in the bush.

REMOVING THE VEIL 37

What a broad world to roam in, what a sea to
swim in is this God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. He is eternal. He antedates time and is
wholly independent of it. Time began in Him and
will end in Him. To it He pays no tribute and from it
He suffers no change.

He is immutable. He has never changed and can
never change in any smallest measure. To change He
would need to go from better to worse or from worse
to better. He cannot do either, for being perfect He
cannot become more perfect, and if He were to be-
come less perfect He would be less than God,

He is omniscient. He knows in one free and ef-
fortless act all matter, all spirit, all relationships,
all events. He has no past and He has no future.
He is, and none of the limiting and qualifying
terms used of creatures can apply to Him.

Love and mercy and righteousness are His, and holi-
ness so ineffable that no comparisons or figures will
avail to express it. Only fire can give even a remote
conception of it. In fire He appeared at the burning
bush; in the pillar of fire He dwelt through all the
long wilderness journey. The fire that glowed be-
tween the wings of the cherubim in the holy place
was called the Shekinah, the Presence, through the
years of Israel’s glory, and when the Old had given
place to the New, He came at Pentecost as a fiery
flame and rested upon each disciple.

Spinoza wrote of the intellectual love of God, and
he had a measure of truth there. But the highest
love of God is not intellectual, it is spiritual. God is
Spirit and only the spirit of a man can know Him re-

38 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

ally. In the deep spirit of a man the fire must glow or
his love is not the true love of God. The great of the
kingdom have been those who loved God more
than others did. We all know who they have been
and gladly pay tribute to the depth and sincerity of
their devotion. We have but to pause for a moment
and their names come trooping past us, smelling of
myrth and aloes and cassia out of the ivory palaces.
Frederick Faber was one whose soul panted after
God as the roe deer pants after the water brook, and
the measure in which God revealed Himself to his
seeking heart set the good man’s whole life afire
with a burning adoration rivaling that of the sera-
phim before the throne. His love for God extended
to the three Persons of the Godhead equally, yet he
seemed to feel for each One a special kind of love re-
served for Him alone. Of God the Father he sings:

Only to sit and think of God
Oh what a joy it is!

To think the thought, to breathe the

Name;

Earth has no higher bliss.

Father of Jesus, love’s reward!
What rapture it will be,

Prostrate before Thy throne to lie,
And gaze and gaze on Thee!

His love for the Person of Christ was so intense
that it threatened to consume him. It burned
within him as a sweet and holy madness and
flowed from his lips like molten gold. In one of his
sermons he says,

REMOVING THE VEIL 39

Wherever we turn in the church of God,
there is Jesus. He is the beginning, middle
and end of everything to us. . . . There is
nothing good, nothing holy, nothing beauti-
ful, nothing joyous which He is not to His
servants. No one need to be poor, because, if
he chooses, he can have Jesus for his own
property and possession. No one need be
downcast, for Jesus is the joy of heaven, and
it is His joy to enter into sorrowful hearts.
We can exaggerate about many things; but
we can never exaggerate our obligation to
Jesus or the compassionate abundance of
the love of Jesus to us. All our lives long we
might talk of Jesus, and yet we should never
come to an end of the sweet things that
might be said of Him. Eternity will not be
long enough to learn all He is, or to praise
Him for all He has done, but then, that mat-
ters not; for we shall be always with Him,
and we desire nothing more.

And addressing our Lord directly he says to
Him:

Tlove Thee so, I know not how
My transports to control;

Thy love is like a burning fire
Within my very soul.

Faber’s blazing love extended also to the Holy
Spirit. Not only in his theology did he acknowledge
His deity and full equality with the Father and the
Son, but he celebrated it constantly in his songs and

40 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

in his prayers. He literally pressed his forehead to
the ground in his eager, fervid worship of the Third
Person of the Godhead. In one of his great hymns to
the Holy Spirit he sums up his burning devotion
thus:

O Spirit, beautiful and dread!
My heart is fit to break

With love of all Thy tenderness
For us poor sinners’ sake.

Thave risked the tedium of quotation that 1 might
show by pointed example what I have set out to
say, viz., that God is so vastly wonderful, so utterly
and completely delightful that He can, without
anything other than Himself, meet and overflow
the deepest demands of our total nature, mysteri-
ous and deep as that nature is. Such worship as
Faber knew (and he is but one of a great company
which no man can number) can never come from a
mere doctrinal knowledge of God. Hearts that are
“fit to break” with love for the Godhead are those
who have been in the Presence and have looked.
with opened eye upon the majesty of Deity. Men of
the breaking hearts had a quality about them not
known to nor understood by common men. They
habitually spoke with spiritual authority. They had
been in the presence of God and they reported
what they saw there.

They were prophets, not scribes, for the scribe
tells us what he has read, and the prophet tells what
he has seen. The distinction is not an imaginary one.
Between the scribe who has read and the prophet

REMOVING THE VEIL 41

who has seen there is a difference as wide as the sea.
We are overrun today with orthodox scribes, but
the prophets, where are they? The hard voice of the
scribe sounds over evangelicalism, but the Church
waits for the tender voice of the saint who has pene-
trated the veil and has gazed with inward eye upon
the wonder that is God. And yet, thus to penetrate,
to push in sensitive living experience into the holy
Presence, is a privilege open to every child of God.

With the veil removed by the rending of Jesus’
flesh, with nothing on God’s side to prevent us
from entering, why do we tarry without? Why do
we consent to abide all our days just outside the
Holy of Holies and never enter at all to look upon
God? We hear the Bridegroom say, “Let me see thy
countenance, let me hear thy voice; for sweet is thy
voice, and thy countenance is comely” (Song of Sol-
omon 2:14), We sense that the call is for us, but still
we fail to draw near, and the years pass and we
grow old and tired in the outer courts of the taber-
nacle. What hinders us?

The answer usually given, simply that we are
“cold,” will not explain all the facts. There is some-
thing more serious than coldness of heart, something
that may be back of that coldness and be the cause of
its existence. What is it? What but the presence of a veil
in our hearts? A veil not taken away as the first veil was,
but which remains there still shutting out the light
and hiding the face of God from us. It is the veil of our
fleshly, fallen nature living on, unjudged within us,
uncrucified and unrepudiated. It is the close-woven
veil of the self-life which we have never truly ac-

42 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

knowledged, of which we have been secretly
ashamed, and which for these reasons we have never
brought to the judgment of the cross. Itis not too mys-
terious, this opaque veil, nor is it hard to identify. We
have but to look into our own hearts and we shall see
it there, sewn and patched and repaired it may be, but
there nevertheless, an enemy to our lives and an effec-
tive block to our spiritual progress.

This veil is not a beautiful thing and it is not a
thing about which we commonly care to talk. But I
am addressing the thirsting souls who are deter-
mined to follow God, and I know they will not turn
back because the way leads temporarily through
the blackened hills. The urge of God within them
will assure their continuing pursuit. They will face
the facts however unpleasant and endure the cross
for the joy set before them. So I am bold toname the
threads out of which this inner veil is woven.

Itis woven of the fine threads of the self-life, the
hyphenated sins of the human spirit. They are not
something we do, they are something we are, and
therein lies both their subtlety and their power.

To be specific, the self-sins are self-righteousness,
self-pity, self-confidence, self- sufficiency, self-ad-
miration, self-love and a host of others like them.
They dwell too deep within us and are too much a
part of our natures to come to our attention till the
light of God is focused upon them. The grosser
manifestations of these sins—egotism, exhibition-
ism, self-promotion—are strangely tolerated in
Christian leaders, even in circles of impeccable or-
thodoxy. They are so much in evidence as actually,

REMOVING THE VEIL 43

for many people, to become identified with the gos-
pel. I trust it is not a cynical observation to say that
they appear these days to be a requisite for popular-
ity in some sections of the church visible. Promoting
self under the guise of promoting Christ is currently
so common as to excite little notice.

One should suppose that proper instruction in
the doctrines of man’s depravity and the necessity
for justification through the righteousness of Christ
alone would deliver us from the power of the
self-sins, but it does not work that way. Self can live
unrebuked at the very altar. It can watch the bleed-
ing Victim die and not be in the least affected by
whatit sees. It can fight for the faith of the reformers
and preach eloquently the creed of salvation by
grace and gain strength by its efforts. To tell the
truth, it seems actually to feed upon orthodoxy and
is more at home in a Bible conference than in a tav-
ern. Our very state of longing after God may afford
it an excellent condition under which to thrive and
grow.

Self is the opaque veil that hides the face of God
from us. It can be removed only in spiritual experi-
ence, never by mere instruction. We may as well try
to instruct leprosy out of our system. There must be
a work of God in destruction before we are free. We
must invite the cross to do its deadly work within
us. We must bring our self-sins to the cross for judg-
ment. We must prepare ourselves for an ordeal of
suffering in some measure like that through which
our Savior passed when He suffered under Pontius
Pilate.

44 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

Let us remember that when we talk of the rend-
ing of the veil we are speaking in a figure, and the
thought of it is poetical, almost pleasant, but in actu-
ality there is nothing pleasant about it. In human
experience that veil is made of living spiritual tissue;
it is composed of the sentient, quivering stuff of
which our whole beings consist, and to touch it is to
touch us where we feel pain. To tear it away is to in-
jure us, to hurt us and make us bleed. To say other-
wise is to make the cross no cross and death no
death at all. Itis never fun to die. To rip through the
dear and tender stuff of which life is made can
never be anything but deeply painful. Yet that is
what the cross did to Jesus and it is what the cross
would do to every man to set him free.

Let us beware of tinkering with our inner life,
hoping ourselves to rend the veil. God must do ev-
erything for us. Our part is to yield and trust. We
must confess, forsake, repudiate the self-life, and
then reckon it crucified. But we must be careful to
distinguish lazy “acceptance” from the real work of
God. We must insist upon the work being done. We
dare not rest content with a neat doctrine of self-
crucifixion. That is to imitate Saul and spare the best
of the sheep and the oxen.

Insist that the work be done in very truth and it will
be done. The cross is rough and itis deadly, but it is ef-
fective. It does not keep its victim hanging there for-
ever. There comes a moment when its work is
finished and the suffering victim dies. After that is res-
urrection glory and power, and the pain is forgotten
for joy that the veil is taken away and we have en-

REMOVING THE VEIL 45.

tered in actual spiritual experience the presence of the
living God.

* e *

Lord, how excellent are Thy ways, and how devious
and dark are the ways of man. Show us how to
die, that we may rise again to newness of life.
Rend the veil of our self-life from the top down
as Thou didst rend the veil of the Temple. We
would draw near in full assurance of faith.
We would dwell with Thee in daily experience
here on this earth so that we may be accustomed
to the glory when we enter Thy heaven to
dwell with Thee there.

In Jesus’ name.

Amen.
