The Pursuit of God
Chapter 4: 4

Apprehending God
O taste and see. (Psalm 34:8)

anon Holmes, of India, more than twenty-

five years ago called attention to the inferen-
tial character of the average man’s faith in God. To
most people God is an inference, not a reality. He is
a deduction from evidence which they consider ad-
equate, but He remains personally unknown to the
individual. “He must be,” they say, “therefore we
believe He is.” Others do not go even so far as this;
they know of Him only by hearsay. They have
never bothered to think the matter out for them-
selves, but have heard about Him from others, and
have put belief in Him into the back of their minds
along with various odds and ends that make up
their total creed. To many others, God is but an
ideal, another name for goodness or beauty or
truth; or He is law or life or the creative impulse
back of the phenomena of existence.

47

48 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

These notions about God are many and varied,
but they who hold them have one thing in com-
mon: They do not know God in personal experi-
ence. The possibility of intimate acquaintance with
Him has not entered their minds. While admitting
His existence they do not think of Him as being
knowable in the sense that we know things or peo-
ple.

Christians, to be sure, go further than this, at least
in theory. Their creed requires them to believe in
the personality of God and they have been taught
to pray, “Our Father which art in heaven” (Luke
11:2). Now personality and fatherhood carry with
them the idea of the possibility of personal acquain-
tance. This is admitted, I say, in theory, but for mil-
lions of Christians, nevertheless, God is no more
real than He is to the non-Christian. They go
through life trying to love an ideal and be loyal to a
mere principle.

Over against all this cloudy vagueness stands the
clear scriptural doctrine that God can be known in
personal experience. A loving Personality domi-
nates the Bible, walking among the trees of the gar-
den and breathing fragrance over every scene.
Always a living Person is present, speaking, plead-
ing, loving, working and manifesting Himself
whenever and wherever His people have the re-
ceptivity necessary to receive the manifestation.

The Bible assumes as a self-evident fact that men
can know God with at least the same degree of im-
mediacy as they know any other person or thing
that comes within the field of their experience. The

APPREHENDING GOD 49

same terms are used to express the knowledge of
God as are used to express knowledge of physical
things. “O faste and see that the LORD is good”
(Psalm 34:8, emphasis added). “All thy garments
smell of myrrh, and aloes, and cassia, out of the ivory
palaces” (45:8). “My sheep hear my voice” (John
10:27, emphasis added). “Blessed are the pure in
heart: for they shall see God” (Matthew 5:8, empha-
sis added). These are but four of countless such pas-
sages from the Word of God. And more important
than any proof text is the fact that the whole import
of Scripture is toward this belief.

What can all this mean except that we have in
our hearts organs by means of which we can
know God as certainly as we know material
things through our familiar five senses? We ap-
prehend the physical world by exercising the fac-
ulties given us for that purpose, and we possess
spiritual faculties by means of which we can
know God and the spiritual world if we will obey
the Spirit’s urge and begin to use them.

That a saving work must first be done in the heart
is taken for granted here. The spiritual faculties of
the unregenerate man lie asleep in his nature, un-
used, and for every purpose dead. That is the stroke
which has fallen upon us by sin. They may be
quickened to active life again by the operation of
the Holy Spirit in regeneration. That is one of the
immeasurable benefits which comes to us through
Christ’s atoning work on the cross.

But why do the very ransomed children of God
themselves know so little of that habitual, conscious

50 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

communion with God which Scripture offers? The
answer is because of our chronic unbelief. Faith en-
ables our spiritual sense to function. Where faith is
defective the result will be inward insensibility and
numbness toward spiritual things. This is the condi-
tion of vast numbers of Christians today. No proof
is necessary to support that statement. We have but
to converse with the first Christian we meet or enter
the first church we open to acquire all the proof we
need.

Aspiritual kingdom lies all about us, enclosing us,
embracing us, altogether within reach of our inner
selves, waiting for us to recognize it. God Himself is
here waiting our response to His presence. This
eternal world will come alive to us the moment we
begin to reckon upon its reality.

T have just now used two words which demand
definition. Or if definition is impossible, I must at
least make clear what I mean when I use them.
They are reckon and reality.

What do I mean by reality? I mean that which has
existence apart from any idea any mind may have
of it, and which would exist if there were no mind
anywhere to entertain a thought of it. That which is
real has being in itself. It does not depend upon the
observer for its validity.

I am aware that there are those who love to
poke fun at the plain man’s idea of reality. They
are the idealists who spin endless proofs that
nothing is real outside of the mind. They are the
relativists who like to show that there are no fixed
points in the universe from which we can mea-

APPREHENDING GOD 51

sure anything. They smile down upon us from
their lofty intellectual peaks and settle us to their
own satisfaction by fastening upon us the re-
proachful term “absolutist.” The Christian is not
put out of countenance by this show of contempt.
He can smile right back at them, for he knows that
there is only One who is Absolute, that is God. But
he knows also that the Absolute One has made
this world for man’s use, and while there is noth-
ing fixed or real in the last meaning of the words
(the meaning as applied to God), for every purpose
of human life we are permitted to act as if there were.
And every man does act thus except the mentally
sick. These unfortunates also have trouble with
reality, but they are consistent; they insist upon
living in accordance with their ideas of things.
They are honest, and it is their very honesty
which constitutes them a social problem.

The idealists and relativists are not mentally sick.
They prove their soundness by living their lives ac-
cording to the very notions of reality which they in
theory repudiate and by counting upon the very
fixed points which they prove are not there. They
could earn a lot more respect for their notions if
they were willing to live by them; but this they are
careful not to do. Their ideas are brain-deep, not
life-deep. Wherever life touches them they repudi-
ate their theories and live like other men.

The Christian is too sincere to play with ideas
for their own sake. He takes no pleasure in the
mere spinning of gossamer webs for display. All
his beliefs are practical. They are geared into his

52 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

life. By them he lives or dies, stands or falls for this
world and for all time to come. From the insincere
man he turns away.

The sincere, plain man knows that the world is
real. He finds it here when he wakes to conscious-
ness, and he knows that he did not think it into be-
ing. It was here waiting for him when he came, and
he knows that when he prepares to leave this
earthly scene it will be here still to bid him goodbye
as he departs. By the deep wisdom of life he is wiser
than a thousand men who doubt. He stands upon
the earth and feels the wind and rain in his face, and
he knows that they are real. He sees the sun by day
and the stars by night. He sees the hot lightning
play out of the dark thundercloud. He hears the
sounds of nature and the cries of human joy and
pain. These he knows are real. He lies down on the
cool earth at night and has no fear that it will prove
illusory or fail him while he sleeps. In the morning
the firm ground will be under him, the blue sky
above him and the rocks and trees around him as
when he closed his eyes the night before. So he lives
and rejoices in a world of reality.

With his five senses he engages this real world.
All things necessary to his physical existence he
apprehends by the faculties with which he has
been equipped by the God who created him and
placed him in such a world as this.

Now by our definition also God is real. He is real
in the absolute and final sense that nothing else is.
All other reality is contingent upon His. The great
Reality is God, the Author of that lower and de-

APPREHENDING GOD 53

pendent reality which makes up the sum of created
things, including ourselves. God has objective exis-
tence independent of and apart from any notions
which we may have concerning Him. The worship-
ing heart does not create its Object. It finds Him
here when it wakes from its mortal slumber in the
morning of its regeneration.

Another word that must be cleared up is reckon.
This does not mean to visualize or imagine. Imagi-
nation is not faith. The two are not only different
from, but stand in sharp opposition to, each other.
imagination projects unreal images out of the mind
and seeks to attach reality to them. Faith creates
nothing; it simply reckons upon that which is al-
ready there.

God and the spiritual world are real. We can
reckon upon them with as much assurance as we
reckon upon the familiar world around us. Spiritual
things are there (or rather we should say here) invit-
ing our attention and challenging our trust.

Our trouble is that we have established bad
thought habits. We habitually think of the visible
world as real and doubt the reality of any other. We
do not deny the existence of the spiritual world but
we doubt that it is real in the accepted meaning of
the word.

The world of sense intrudes upon our attention
day and night for the whole of our lifetime. It is
clamorous, insistent and self- demonstrating. It
does not appeal to our faith; it is here, assaulting our
five senses, demanding to be accepted as real and fi-
nal. But sin has so clouded the lenses of our hearts

54 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

that we cannot see that other reality, the City of
God, shining around us. The world of sense tri-
umphs. The visible becomes the enemy of the invis-
ible, the temporal, of the eternal. That is the curse
inherited by every member of Adam’s tragic race.

At the root of the Christian life lies belief in the
invisible. The object of the Christians’s faith is un-
seen reality.

Our uncorrected thinking, influenced by the
blindness of our natural hearts and the intrusive
ubiquity of visible things, tends to draw a contrast
between the spiritual and the real—but actually no
such contrast exists. The antithesis lies elsewhere—
between the real and the imaginary, between the
spiritual and the material, between the temporal
and the eternal; but between the spiritual and the
real, never. The spiritual is real.

If we would rise into that region of light and
power plainly beckoning us through the Scrip-
tures of truth, we must break the evil habit of ig-
noring the spiritual. We must shift our interest
from the seen to the unseen. For the great unseen
Reality is God. “He that cometh to God must be-
lieve that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them
that diligently seek him” (Hebrews 11:6). This is
basic in the life of faith. From there we can rise to
unlimited heights. “Ye believe in God,” said our
Lord Jesus Christ, “believe also in me” (John 14:1).
Without the first there can be no second.

If we truly want to follow God, we must seek to
be other-worldly. This I say knowing well that word
has been used with scorn by the sons of this world

APPREHENDING GOD 55

and applied to the Christian as a badge of reproach.
So be it. Every man must choose his world. If we
who follow Christ, with all the facts before us and
knowing what we are about, deliberately choose
the kingdom of God as our sphere of interest, I see
no reason why anyone should object. If we lose by
it, the loss is our own; if we gain, we rob no one by
so doing. The “other world,” which is the object of
this world’s disdain and the subject of the drunk-
ard’s mocking song, is our carefully chosen goal and
the object of our holiest longing.

But we must avoid the common fault of push-
ing the “other world” into the future. It is not fu-
ture, but present. It parallels our familiar physical
world, and the doors between the two worlds are
open. “Ye are come,” says the writer to the He-
brews (and the tense is plainly present),

unto mount Sion, and unto the city of the
living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to
an innumerable company of angels, to the
general assembly and church of the first-
born, which are written in heaven, and to
God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just
men made perfect, and to Jesus the mediator
of the new covenant, and to the blood of
sprinkling, that speaketh better things than
that of Abel. (Hebrews 12:22-24)

All these things are contrasted with “the mount that
might be touched” (12:18) and “the sound of a trum-
pet, and the voice of words” (12:19) that might be
heard. May we not safely conclude that, as the reali-

56 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

ties of Mount Sinai were apprehended by the senses,
so the realities of Mount Zion are to be grasped by the
soul? And this not by any trick of the imagination but
in downright actuality. The soul has eyes with which
to see and ears with which to hear. Feeble they may
be from long disuse, but by the life-giving touch of
Christ they are now alive and capable of sharpest
sight and most sensitive hearing.

As we begin to focus upon God, the things of the
spirit will take shape before our inner eyes. Obedi-
ence to the word of Christ will bring an inward rev-
elation of the Godhead (John 14:21-23). It will give
acute perception enabling us to see God even as is
promised to the pure in heart. A new God-con-
sciousness will seize upon us and we shall begin to
taste and hear and inwardly feel God, who is our
life and our all. There will be seen the constant shin-
ing of “the true Light, which lighteth every man
that cometh into the world’ (John 1:9). More and
more, as our faculties grow sharper and more sure,
God will become to us the great All, and His pres-
ence the glory and wonder of our lives.

ek

O God, quicken to life every power within
me, that I may lay hold on eternal things. Open my
eyes that I may see; give me acute spiritual
perception; enable me to taste Thee and know
that Thou art good. Make heaven more real to
me than earthly thing has ever been.
Amen.
