The Pursuit of God
Chapter 5: The Universal Presence

Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither
shall I flee from thy presence? (Psalm 139:7)

I: all Christian teaching certain basic truths are
found, hidden at times, and rather assumed
than asserted, but necessary to all truth as the pri-
mary colors are found in and necessary to the fin-
ished painting. Such a truth is the divine imma-
nence.

God dwells in His creation and is everywhere
indivisibly present in all His works. This is boldly
taught by prophet and apostle, and is accepted by
Christian theology generally. Thatis, it appears in
the books, but for some reason it has not sunk into
the average Christian’s heart so as to become a
part of his believing self. Christian teachers shy
away from its full implications and, if they men-
tion it at all, mute it down till it has little meaning.
I would guess the reason for this to be the fear of

57

58 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

being charged with pantheism. But the doctrine
of the divine Presence is definitely not pantheism.

Pantheism’s error is too palpable to deceive
anyone. It is that God is the sum of all created
things. Nature and God are one, so that whoever
touches a leaf or a stone touches God. That is, of
course, to degrade the glory of the incorruptible
Deity and, in an effort to make all things divine,
banish all divinity from the world entirely.

The truth is that while God dwells in His world
He is separated from it by a gulf forever impass-
able. However closely He may be identified with
the work of His hands, they are and must eter-
nally be other than He, and He is and must be an-
tecedent to and independent of them. He is
transcendent above all His works even while He
is immanent within them.

What does the divine immanence mean in direct
Christian experience? It means simply that God is
here. Wherever we are, God is here. There is no
place, there can be no place where He is not. Ten
million intelligences standing at as many points in
space and separated by incomprehensible distances
can each one say with equal truth, God is here. No
point is nearer to God than any other point. It is ex-
actly as near to God from any place as it is from any
other place. No one is in mere distance any further
from or any nearer to God than any other person.

These are truths believed by every instructed.
Christian. It remains for us to think on them and
pray over them until they begin to glow within
us.

THE UNIVERSAL PRESENCE 59

“In the beginning God . . .” (Genesis 1:1). Not
matter, for matter is not self-causing. It requires an
antecedent cause, and God is that Cause. Not law,
for law is but a name for the course which all cre-
ation follows. That course had to be planned, and
the Planner is God. Not mind, for mind also is a cre-
ated thing and must have a Creator back of it. In the
beginning God, the uncaused Cause of matter,
mind and law. There we must begin.

Adam sinned and, in his panic, frantically tried to
do the impossible; he tried to hide from the pres-
ence of God. David also must have had wild
thoughts of trying to escape from the Presence, for
he wrote, “Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or
whither shall I flee from thy presence?” (Psalm
139:7). Then he proceeded through one of his most
beautiful psalms to celebrate the glory of the divine
immanence. “If I ascend up into heaven, thou art
there: if I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art
there. If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell
in the uttermost parts of the sea; even there shall
thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold
me” (139:8-10). And he knew that God's being and
God's seeing are the same, that the seeing Presence
had been with him even before he was born, watch-
ing the mystery of unfolding life. Solomon ex-
claimed, “But will God indeed dwell on the earth?
behold, the heaven and heaven of heavens cannot
contain thee; how much less this house that I have
builded” (1 Kings 8:27). Paul assured the Athenians
that “he be not far from every one of us: for in him

60 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

we live, and move, and have our being” (Acts
17:27-28).

If God is present at every point in space, if we
cannot go where He is not, cannot even conceive of
a place where He is not, why then has not that Pres-
ence become the one universally celebrated fact of
the world? The patriarch Jacob, “in the waste howl
ing wilderness” (Deuteronomy 32:10), gave the an-
swer to that question. He saw a vision of God and
cried out in wonder, “Surely the LORD is in this
place; and I knew it not” (Genesis 28:16). Jacob had
never been for one small division of a moment out-
side the circle of that all-pervading Presence. But he
knew it not. That was his trouble, and itis ours. Men
do not know that God is here. What a difference it
would make if they knew.

The Presence and the manifestation of the Pres-
ence are not the same. There can be the one without
the other. God is here when we are wholly unaware
of it. He is manifest only when and as we are aware
of His presence. On our part, there must be surren-
der to the Spirit of God, for His work is to show us
the Father and the Son. If we cooperate with Him in
loving obedience, God will manifest Himself to us,
and that manifestation will be the difference be-
tween a nominal Christian life and a life radiant
with the light of His face.

Always, everywhere God is present, and always
He seeks to discover Himself to each one. He would
reveal not only that He is, but what He is as well. He
did not have to be persuaded to reveal Himself to
Moses. “And the LORD descended in the cloud, and

THE UNIVERSAL PRESENCE 61

stood with him there, and proclaimed the name of
the LORD” (Exodus 34:5). He not only made a verbal
proclamation of His nature but He revealed His
very Self to Moses so that the skin of Moses’ face
shone with the supernatural light. It will be a great
moment for some of us when we begin to believe
that God's promise of self-revelation is literally true,
that He promised much, but no more than He in-
tends to fulfill.

Our pursuit of God is successful just because He
is forever seeking to manifest Himself to us. The
revelation of God to any man is not God coming
from a distance once upon a time to pay a brief and
momentous visit to the man’s soul. Thus to think of
itis to misunderstand it all. The approach of God to
the soul or of the soul to God is not to be thought of
in spatial terms at all. There is no idea of physical
distance involved in the concept. It is not a matter of
miles but of experience.

To speak of being near to or far from God is to use
language in a sense always understood when ap-
plied to our ordinary human relationships. A man
may say, “I feel that my son is coming nearer to me
as he gets older,” and yet that son has lived by his
father’s side since he was born and has never been
away from home more than a day or so in his entire
life. What then can the father mean? Obviously he
is speaking of experience. He means that the boy is
coming to know him more intimately and with
deeper understanding, that the barriers of thought
and feeling between the two are disappearing, that

62 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

father and son are becoming more closely united in
mind and heart.

So when we sing, “Draw me nearer, nearer,
nearer, blessed Lord,” we are not thinking of the
nearness of place, but of the nearness of relation-
ship. It is for increasing degrees of awareness that
we pray, for a more perfect consciousness of the di-
vine Presence. We need never shout across the
spaces to an absent God. He is nearer than our own
soul, closer than our most secret thoughts.

Why do some persons “find” God in a way that
others do not? Why does God manifest His pres-
ence to some and let multitudes of others struggle
along in the half- light of imperfect Christian experi-
ence? Of course, the will of God is the same for all.
He has no favorites within His household. All He
has ever done for any of His children He will do for
all of His children. The difference lies not with God
but with us.

Pick at random a score of great saints whose lives
and testimonies are widely known, Let them be Bi-
ble characters or well-known Christians of post-bib-
lical times. You will be struck instantly with the fact
that the saints were not alike. Sometimes the
unlikenesses were so great as to be positively glar-
ing. How different, for example, was Moses from
Isaiah; how different was Elijah from David; how
unlike each other were John and Paul, St. Francis
and Luther, Finney and Thomas a Kempis. The dif-
ferences are as wide as human life itself—differ-
ences of race, nationality, education, temperament,
habit and personal qualities. Yet they all walked,

THE UNIVERSAL PRESENCE 63

each in his day, upon a high road of spiritual living
far above the common way.

Their differences must have been incidental and
in the eyes of God of no significance. In some vital
quality they must have been alike. What was it?

I venture to suggest that the one vital quality
which they had in common was spiritual receptiv-
ity. Something in them was open to heaven, some-
thing which urged them Godward. Without
attempting anything like a profound analysis, I
shall say simply that they had spiritual awareness
and that they went on to cultivate it until it became
the biggest thing in their lives. They differed from
the average person in that when they felt the in-
ward longing they did something about it. They ac-
quired the lifelong habit of spiritual response. They
were not disobedient to the heavenly vision. As Da-
vid put it neatly, “When thou saidst, Seek ye my
face; my heart said unto thee, Thy face, LORD, will I
seek” (Psalm 27:8).

As with everything good in human life, back of
this receptivity is God. The sovereignty of God is
here, and is felt even by those who have not
placed particular stress upon it theologically. The
pious Michelangelo confessed this in a sonnet:

My unassisted heart is barren clay,

That of its native self can nothing
feed:

Of good and pious works Thou are
the seed,

That quickens only where Thou sayest
it may:

64 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

Unless Thou show to us Thine own
true way

No man can find it: Father! Thou must
lead.

These words will repay study as the deep and se-
rious testimony of a great Christian.

Important as it is that we recognize God work-
ing in us, I would yet warn against a too-great
preoccupation with the thought. It is a sure road
to sterile passivity. God will not hold us responsi-
ble to understand the mysteries of election, pre-
destination and the divine sovereignty. The best
and safest way to deal with these truths is to raise
our eyes to God and in deepest reverence say, “O
Lord, Thou knowest.” Those things belong to the
deep and mysterious profound of God’s omni-
science. Prying into them may make theologians,
but it will never make saints.

Receptivity is not a single thing; rather, it is a
compound, a blending of several elements within
the soul. It is an affinity for, a bent toward, a sympa-
thetic response to, a desire to have. From this it may
be gathered that it can be present in degrees, that
we may have little or more, depending upon the in-
dividual. It may be increased by exercise or de-
stroyed by neglect. It is not a sovereign and
irresistible force which comes upon us as a seizure
from above. It is a gift of God, indeed, but one
which must be recognized and cultivated as any
other gift if we are to realize the purpose for which
it was given.

THE UNIVERSAL PRESENCE 65

Failure to see this is the cause of a very serious
breakdown in modern evangelicalism. The idea
of cultivation and exercise, so dear to the saints of
old, has now no place in our total religious pic-
ture. It is too slow, too common. We now demand
glamour and fast-flowing dramatic action. A gen-
eration of Christians reared among push buttons
and automatic machines is impatient of slower
and less direct methods of reaching their goals.
We have been trying to apply machine-age meth-
ods to our relations with God. We read our chap-
ter, have our short devotions and rush away,
hoping to make up for our deep inward bank-
ruptcy by attending another gospel meeting or
listening to another thrilling story told by a reli-
gious adventurer lately returned from afar.

The tragic results of this spirit are all about us:
shallow lives, hollow religious philosophies, the
preponderance of the element of fun in gospel
meetings, the glorification of men, trust in religious
externalities, quasi- religious fellowships, salesman-
ship methods, the mistaking of dynamic personal-
ity for the power of the Spirit. These and such as
these are the symptoms of an evil disease, a deep
and serious malady of the soul.

For this great sickness that is upon us no one per-
son is responsible, and no Christian is wholly free
from blame. We have all contributed directly or in-
directly, to this sad state of affairs. We have been too
blind to see, or too timid to speak out, or too self-sat-
isfied to desire anything better than the poor, aver-
age diet with which others appear satisfied. To put

66 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

it differently, we have accepted one another’s no-
tions, copied one another's lives and made one an-
other's experiences the model for our own. And for
a generation the trend has been downward. Now
we have reached a low place of sand and burnt wire
grass and, worst of all, we have made the Word of
Truth conform to our experience and accepted this
low plane as the very pasture of the blessed.

It will require a determined heart and more than
a little courage to wrench ourselves loose from the
grip of our times and return to biblical ways. But it
can be done. Every now and then in the past Chris-
tians have had to do it. History has recorded several
large-scale returns led by such men as St. Francis,
Martin Luther and George Fox. Unfortunately,
there seems to be no Luther or Fox on the horizon at
present. Whether or not another such return may
be expected before the coming of Christ is a ques-
tion upon which Christians are not fully agreed, but
that is not of too great importance to us now.

What God in His sovereignty may yet do on a
world-scale I do not claim to know. But what He
will do for the plain man or woman who seeks His
face I believe I do know and can tell others. Let any
man turn to God in earnest, let him begin to exercise
himself unto godliness, let him seek to develop his
powers of spiritual receptivity by trust and obedi-
ence and humility, and the results will exceed any-
thing he may have hoped in his leaner and weaker
days.

Any man who by repentance and a sincere return
to God will break himself out of the mold in which he

THE UNIVERSAL PRESENCE 67

has been held, and will go to the Bible itself for his
spiritual standards, will be delighted with what he
finds there.

Let us say it again: The universal Presence is a
fact. God is here. The whole universe is alive with
His life. And He is no strange or foreign God, but
the familiar Father of our Lord Jesus Christ whose
love has for these thousands of years enfolded the
sinful race of men. And always He is trying to get
our attention, to reveal Himself to us, to communi-
cate with us. We have within us the ability to know
Him if we will but respond to His overtures. (And
this we call pursuing God!) We will know Him in
increasing degree as our receptivity becomes more
perfect by faith and love and practice.

a

O God and Father, I repent of my sinful preoccupa-
tion with visible things. The world has been too much
with me. Thou hast been here and I knew it not.
Thave been blind to Thy presence. Open my eyes
that I may behold Thee in and around me.

For Christ’s sake.

Anten.
