The Pursuit of God
Chapter 8: 8

Restoring the
Creator-Creature
Relation

Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens; let
thy glory be above all the earth. (Psalm 57:5)

I: is true that order in nature depends upon
right relationships; to achieve harmony each
thing must be in its proper position relative to
each other thing. In human life it is not otherwise.

T have hinted before in these chapters that the
cause of all our human miseries is a radical moral
dislocation, an upset in our relation to God and to
each other. For whatever else the Fall may have
been, it was certainly a sharp change in man’s re-
lation to his Creator. He adopted toward God an
altered attitude, and by so doing destroyed the
proper Creator-creature relation in which, un-
known to him, his true happiness lay. Essentially,

93

94 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

salvation is the restoration of a right relation be-
tween man and his Creator, a bringing back to
normal of the Creator-creature relation.

A satisfactory spiritual life will begin with a com-
plete change in relation between God and the sin-
ner; not a judicial change merely, but a conscious
and experienced change affecting the sinner’s
whole nature. The atonement in Jesus’ blood makes
such a change judicially possible and the working
of the Holy Spirit makes it emotionally satisfying.
The story of the prodigal son perfectly illustrates
this latter phase. He had brought a world of trouble
upon himself by forsaking the position which he
had properly held as son of his father. At bottom of
his restoration was nothing more than a reestablish-
ing of the father-son relation which had existed
from his birth and had been altered temporarily by
his act of sinful rebellion. This story overlooks the
legal aspects of redemption, but it makes beautifully
clear the experiential aspects of salvation.

In determining relationships we must begin
somewhere. There must be somewhere a fixed cen-
ter against which everything else is measured,
where the law of relativity does not enter and we
can say “IS” and make no allowances. Such a center
is God. When God would make His name known to
mankind He could find no better word than “I AM.”
When He speaks in the first person He says, “I AM”;
when we speak of Him we say, “He is”; when we
speak to Him we say, “Thou art.” Everyone and ev-
erything else measures from that fixed point. “IAM

RESTORING THE CREATOR-CREATURE RELATION 95

THAT I AM,” (Exodus 3:14) says God, “I change
not” (Malachi 3:6).

As the sailor locates his position on the sea by
“shooting” the sun, so we may get our moral bear-
ings by looking at God. We must begin with God.
We are right when, and only when, we stand in a
right position relative to God, and we are wrong so
far and so long as we stand in any other position.

Much of our difficulty as seeking Christians
stems from our unwillingness to take God as He is
and adjust our lives accordingly. We insist upon
trying to modify Him and to bring Him nearer to
our own image. The flesh whimpers against the
rigor of God’s inexorable sentence and begs like
Agag for a little mercy, a little indulgence of its car-
nal ways. Itis no use. We can get a right start only by
accepting God as He is and learning to love Him for
what He is. As we go on to know Him better we
shall find it a source of unspeakable joy that God is
just what He is. Some of the most rapturous mo-
ments we know will be those we spend in reverent
admiration of the Godhead. In those holy moments
the very thought of change in Him will be too pain-
ful to endure.

So let us begin with God. Back of all, above all, be-
fore all is God; first in sequential order, above in
rank and station, exalted in dignity and honor. As
the self-existent One He gave being to all things,
and all things exist out of Him and for Him. “Thou
art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honour
and power: for thou hast created all things, and for

96 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

thy pleasure they are and were created” (Revelation
4:11),

Every soul belongs to God and exists by His plea-
sure. God being who and what He is, and we being
who and what we are, the only thinkable relation
between us is one of full Lordship on His part and
complete submission on ours. We owe Him every
honor that is in our power to give Him. Our ever-
lasting grief lies in giving Him anything less.

The pursuit of God will embrace the labor of
bringing our total personality into conformity to
His. And this not judicially, but actually. I do not
here refer to the act of justification by faith in Christ.
I speak of a voluntary exalting of God to His proper
station over us and a willing surrender of our whole
being to the place of worshipful submission which
the Creator-creature circumstance makes proper.

The moment we make up our minds that we
are going on with this determination to exalt God
over all, we step out of the world’s parade. We
shall find ourselves out of adjustment to the ways
of the world, and increasingly so as we make
progress in the holy way. We shall acquire a new
viewpoint; a new and different psychology will
be formed within us; a new power will begin to
surprise us by its upsurgings and its outgoings.

Our break with the world will be the direct out-
come of our changed relation to God. For the world
of fallen men does not honor God. Millions call
themselves by His name, it is true, and pay some to-
ken respect to Him, but a simple test will show how
little He is really honored among them. Let the av-

RESTORING THE CREATOR-CREATURE RELATION 97

erage man be put to the proof on the question of
who or what is above, and his true position will be
exposed. Let him be forced into making a choice be-
tween God and money, between God and men, be-
tween God and personal ambition, God and self,
God and human love, and God will take second
place every time. Those other things will be exalted
above. However the man may protest, the proof is
in the choices he makes day after day throughout
his life.

“Be thou exalted” (Psalm 21:13) is the language of
victorious spiritual experience. It is a little key to un-
lock the door to great treasures of grace. It is central
in the life of God in the soul. Let the seeking man
reach a place where life and lips join to say continu-
ally, “Be thou exalted,” and a thousand minor prob-
lems will be solved at once. His Christian life ceases
to be the complicated thing it had been before and
becomes the very essence of simplicity. By the exer-
cise of his will he has set his course, and on that
course he will stay as if guided by an automatic pi-
lot. If blown off course for a moment by some ad-
verse wind, he will surely return again as by a secret
bent of the soul. The hidden motions of the Spirit
are working in his favor, and “the stars in their
courses” (Judges 5:20) fight for him. He has met his
life problem at its center, and everything else must
follow along.

Let no one imagine that he will lose anything of
human dignity by this voluntary sell-out of his all to
his God. He does not by this degrade himself as a
man; rather he finds his right place of high honor as

98 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

one made in the image of his Creator. His deep dis-
grace lay in his moral derangement, his unnatural
usurpation of the place of God. His honor will be
proved by restoring again that stolen throne. In ex-
alting God over all he finds his own highest honor
upheld.

Anyone who might feel reluctant to surrender
his will to the will of another should remember Je-
sus’ words, “Whosoever committeth sin is the ser-
vant of sin” (John 8:34). We must of necessity be
servant to someone, either to God or to sin. The
sinner prides himself on his independence, com-
pletely overlooking the fact that he is the weak
slave of the sins that rule his members. The man
who surrenders to Christ exchanges a cruel slave
driver for a kind and gentle Master whose yoke is
easy and whose burden is light.

Made as we were in the image of God, we
scarcely find it strange to take again our God as
our All. God was our original habitat and our
hearts cannot but feel at home when they enter
again that ancient and beautiful abode.

I hope it is clear that there is a logic behind
God's claim to preeminence. That place is His by
every right in earth or heaven. While we take to
ourselves the place that is His, the whole course of
our lives is out of joint. Nothing will or can restore
order till our hearts make the great decision: God
shall be exalted above.

“Them that honour me I will honour” (1 Samuel
2:30), said God once to a priest of Israel, and that an-
cient law of the kingdom stands today unchanged

RESTORING THE CREATOR-CREATURE RELATION 99

by the passing of time or the changes of dispensa-
tion. The whole Bible and every page of history pro-
claim the perpetuation of that law. “If any man
serve me, him will my Father honour” (John 12:26),
said our Lord Jesus, tying in the old with the new
and revealing the essential unity of His ways with
men.

Sometimes the best way to see a thing is to look at
its opposite. Eli and his sons are placed in the priest-
hood with the stipulation that they honor God in
their lives and ministrations. This they fail to do,
and God sends Samuel to announce the conse-
quences. Unknown to Eli this law of reciprocal
honor has been all the while secretly working, and
now the time has come for judgment to fall. Hophni
and Phineas, the degenerate priests, fall in battle;
the wife of Phineas dies in childbirth; Israel flees be-
fore her enemies; the ark of God is captured by the
Philistines, and the old man Eli falls backward and
dies of a broken neck. This stark, utter tragedy fol-
lowed upon Eli's failure to honor God.

Now over against this set almost any Bible
character who honestly tried to glorify God in his
earthly walk. See how God winked at weakness
and overlooked failures as He poured upon His
servants grace and blessing untold. Let it be Abra-
ham, Jacob, David, Daniel, Elijah or whom you
will; honor followed honor as harvest the seed.
The man of God set his heart to exalt God above
all; God accepted his intention as fact and acted
accordingly. Not perfection, but holy intention
made the difference.

100 THE PURSUIT OF GOD

In our Lord Jesus Christ this law was seen in sim-
ple perfection. In His lowly manhood He humbled
Himself and gladly gave all glory to His Father in
heaven. He sought not His own honor, but the
honor of God who sent Him. “If I honour myself,”
He said on one occasion, “my honour is nothing: it
is my Father that honoureth me” (8:54). So far had
the Pharisees departed from this law that they
could not understand one who honored God at his
own expense. “I honour my Father,” said Jesus to
them, “and ye do dishonour me” (8:49).

Another saying of Jesus, and a most disturbing
one, was put in the form of a question. “How can ye
believe, which receive honour one of another, and
seek not the honour that cometh from God only?”
(5:44). If I understand this correctly, Christ taught
here the alarming doctrine that the desire for honor
among men made belief impossible. Is this sin at the
root of religious unbelief? Could it be that those “in-
tellectual difficulties” which men blame for their in-
ability to believe are but smoke screens to conceal
the real cause that lies behind them? Was it this
greedy desire for honor from man that made men
into Pharisees and Pharisees into Deicides? Is this
the secret back of religious self-righteousness and
empty worship? I believe it may be. The whole
course of the life is upset by failure to put God
where He belongs. We exalt ourselves instead of
God and the curse follows.

In our desire after God let us keep always in mind
that God also has desire, and His desire is toward
the sons of men, and more particularly toward

RESTORING THE CREATOR-CREATURE RELATION 101

those sons of men who will make the once-for-all
decision to exalt Him over all. Such as these are pre-
cious to God above all treasures of earth or sea. In
them God finds a theater where He can display His
exceeding kindness toward us in Christ Jesus. With
them God can walk unhindered; toward them He
can act like the God He is.

In speaking thus I have one fear: that I may con-
vince the mind before God can win the heart. For
this God-above-all position is one not easy to take.
The mind may approve it while not having the con-
sent of the will to put it into effect. While the imagi-
nation races ahead to honor God, the will may lag
behind and the man must make the decision before
the heart can know any real satisfaction. God wants
the whole person and He will not rest till He gets us
in entirety. No part of the man will do.

Let us pray over this in detail, throwing ourselves
at God’s feet and meaning everything we say. No
one who prays thus in sincerity need wait long for
tokens of divine acceptance. God will unveil His
glory before His servant's eyes, and He will place all
His treasures at the disposal of such a one, for He
knows that His honor is safe in such consecrated
hands.

* F *

O God, be Thou exalted over my possessions. Nothing
of earth’s treasures shall seem dear unto me if only
Thou art glorified in my life. Be Thou exalted over
my friendships. I am determined that Thou shalt be

102. THE PURSUIT OF GOD

above all, though I must stand deserted and alone in
the midst of the earth. Be Thou exalted above my
comforts. Though it mean the loss of bodily comforts
and the carrying of heavy crosses, I shall keep my vow
made this day before Thee. Be Thou exalted over my
reputation. Make me ambitious to please Thee even if
as a result I must sink into obscurity and my name be
forgotten as a dream. Rise, O Lord, into Thy proper
place of honor, above my ambitions, above my likes
and dislikes, above my family, my health and even my
life itself. Let me sink that Thou mayest rise above.
Ride forth upon me as Thou didst ride into Jerusalem
mounted upon the humble little beast, a colt, the foal
of an ass, and let me hear the children cry to Thee,
“Hosanna in the highest.”
Amen.
